
How to Make
Money in
Stocks
19A3265

How to Make
Money in
Stocks
A Winning System in Good Times or Bad
William J. O'Neil
Second Edition
McGraw-Hill, Inc.
New York San Francisco Washington, D.C. Auckland Bogota
Caracas Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City Milan
Montreal New Delhi San Jüan Singapore
Sydney Tokyo Toronto

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
O'Neil, William J.
How to inake money in Stocks : a winning System in good times or
bad / William J. O'Neil.—2nd ed.
p. 
cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 0-07-048059-1 (hc) 
—ISBN 0-07-048017-6 (pb)
I. Title.
1. Investments. 
2. Stocks.
HG4521.0515 
1995
332.63'22—dc20
94-28192
CIP
Copyright © 1995, 1991, 1988 by McGraw-Hill, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America. Except äs permitted under the
United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a
data base or retrieval System, without the prior written permission of the
publisher.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0
DOC/DOC
DOC/DOC
9 0 9
9 0 9
7 6 5 4
7 6 5 4
(HC)
(PBK)
ISBN 0-07-048059-1 (hc)
ISBN 0-07-048017-6 (pbk)
The Sponsoring editorfor this book was Philip Ruppel, the editing Super-
visor was Fred Bernardi, and the production Supervisor was Suzanne
Babeuf. It was set in Baskerville by McGraw-HiU's Professional Book
Group composition unit.
Printed and bound by R. R. Donnelley & Sons Company.
This book is printed on recycled, acid-free paper containing a
minimum of 50% recycled, de-inked über.
Success in a free country is simple.
Get a Job, get an education, and
learn to save and invest wisely.
Anyone can do it.
You can do it.

Contents
Preface 
ix
Part l A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
Introduction: Learning from the Greatest Winners 
2
1. C = Current Quarterly Earnings Per Share: How Much
Is Enough? 
5
2. A = Annual Earnings Increases: Look for Meaningful
Growth 
14
3. N = New Products, New Management, New Highs:
Buying at the Right Time 
22
4. S = Supply and Demand: Small Capitalization Plus
Big Volume Demand 
29
5. L = Leader or Laggard: Which Is Your Stock? 
34
6. I = Institutional Sponsorship: A Little Goes a Long Way 40
7. M = Market Direction: How to Determine It 
44
Part 2 Be Smart from the Start
8. Finding a Broker, Opening an Account, and What It
Costs to Buy Stocks 
80

vj|j 
Contents
9. When to Seil if Your Selection or Timing Might Be
Wrong 
85
10. When to Seil and Take Your Profit 
97
11. Should You Diversify, Invest for the Long Pull, Buy
on Margin, Seil Short?
12. Should You Buy Options, OTC Stocks,
New Issues...?
13. How You Could Make a Million Owning Mutual
Funds
109
115
131
Part 3 Invcsting likc a Professional
14. Models of the Greatest Stock Market Winners:
1953-1993 
140
15. How to Read Charts like an Expert and Improve
Your Stock Selection and Timing 
160
16. How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial
News Pages 
180
17. The Art of Tape Reading: Analyzing and Reacting to
News 
207
18. How to Pick the Best Industry Groups, Subgroups,
and Market Sectors 
218
19. Improving Management of Pension and Institutional
Portfolios 
230
20. 18 Common Mistakes Most Investors Make
254
Index 
259
Preface
From August 1982 to August 1987, the stock market staged a phänome-
nal 250% increase. Employees' pension funds made a fortune. Then in
one day in October 1987, the market dropped a record 24%. Sanity and
reality returned. That's the stock market.
During the last 50 years, we have had twelve bull (up) markets and
eleveii bear (down) markets. But guess what? The bull markets averaged
going up about 100% and the bear markets, on an average, declined
25% to 30%. Not only that, the typical bull market lasted 3 3/4 years
and the classic bear market lingered only nine months. Viewed with
perspective...that's a terrific deal.
But I will go you one better. Did you know that in the last 100 years
we have had more than 25 bear market slumps (natural, normal correc-
tions of the previous bull market advance), and EVERY SINGLE TIME
THE MARKET RECOVERED AND ULTIMATELYSOARED INTO NEW
HIGH GROUND? That's fantastic.
What causes this continued long-term growth and upward progress?
It's one of the greatest success stories in the world—free people, in a
free country, with strong desires and the incentives to unceasingly
improve their circumstances. America just keeps growing.
The stock market does not go up due to greed. It goes up because of
businesses with new products, new Services, and new inventions...and
there are hundreds of them every year. The innovative entrepreneurial
companies with the best quality new products that serve people's needs
are always the top stock market winners.
So, why haven't more people taken advantage of these tremendous

Preface
investment opportunities? It's that they don't understand the market,
and when you don't understand something you are unsure, maybe even
afraid.
I am going to solve that problem for you. This book will explain the
market to you in simple terms everyone can understand. It will show
you how to select which Stocks to buy and exactly when you should buy
and when you should seil. There are two entire chapters on when to seil
and nail down your profits or cut short potential mistakes. You can
learn how to protect yourself against the big risks in good times or bad.
There are three things I feel absolutely certain about concerning the
next twenty-five years. Our government will continue to tax you äs much
äs it possibly can for äs long äs you live, your cost of living will go up
substantially, and the stock market and economy will be much higher.
You can't do a lot about the first two, but you can benefit materially
from the last one if you learn how to save and invest properly.
Don't be thrown off by the swarm of gloom and doomers. In the long
run, they have seldom made anyone any money or provided any real
happiness. I have also never met a successful pessimist.
There is one overpowering, overriding reason why there should be
other bull markets ahead—the enormous number of baby boomers.
Marriages will be up and couples will need housing, furniture, medical
care, clothing, and education for all the new children. This giant bulge
in future demand will not go away.
Everyone should own common stock! It's a great way to get an extra
income, financial independence, and security. It's a way you can "be in
business for yourself," and it can be safe and sound over the long
term...if you learn to correctly apply all the basic rules for making and
protecting your gains and minimizing losses. It could put your kids
through school, dramatically increase your Standard of living, and give
you freedom and safety in your old age.
I have spent 35 years analyzing how the U.S. economy works. William
O'Neil & Co., also built the first daily Computer data base on the stock
market in this country and used it to construct models of what the most
successful companies looked like just before they became big successes.
In 1970, we moved into the institutional stock research business. We
called our first service Datagraphs. Today we are regarded by some
institutional investors äs the leader in automation in securities analysis
and management. A daily chart service was also developed called Daily
Graphs to which thousands of individual investors subscribe.
In 1983, I designed and created the basic format for Investor's Daily,
a national business newspaper. It was the first paper to make significant
improvements in news available to public investors via daily stock price
Preface
XI
tables and to grow and take share of market away from The Wall Steet
Journal. A completely separate organization was then set up to directly
challenge the sacred 100-year-old east coast-based industry giant.
My prime objective in writing this book is to help everyone discover
how to get ahead by saving and investing.
I'm talking about ordinary people who have never owned Stocks;
those deeply concerned about Inflation and their dwindliiig dollar;
everyday individuals investing in a local savings account, a money mar-
ket fund, or a mortgage; people who may have bought a little art, gold,
or silver.
This book will also help renters who dream of one day buying a hörne
or income property, and those investors who already enjoy home owner-
ship. It is for amateur investors in the stock market, people considering
an IRA (Individual Retirement Account) or a mutual fund, retired per-
sons, teachers of Investment courses, and students attempting to learn
about Investments. It should be used in schools, whether grade school,
junior high, high school, or College level. Young people growing up
should learn how the American economy and market really work and
how they can materially benefit from it.
Lastly, this book is for sophisticated professionals managing pension
and mutual funds, whose difficult Job it is to produce investment results
and stay ahead in a very complex and confusing game.
It is also for those who seek professional advice in the supervision of
state and public employee funds and educational and charitable invest-
ment portfolios, and for foreign investors who want to invest money in
the U.S.A., the land of unmatched personal freedorn and opportunity.
My deep appreciation and heartfelt thanks go out to those loyal hard-
working souls who read, edited, worked on the graphics, criticized,
typed, and retyped the endless changes made to this work. Some of
those dedicated individuals are Anne Gerhard, Carolyn Hoffman,
Jeannie Kihm, Jim Lan, Stanley Liu, Diane Marin, Milton Perrin, Kathy
Russell, Lindee Shadrake, Kathy Sherman, Frank Spillers, and Susan
Warfei. And, of course, a great amount of valuable assistance and
numerous suggestions were provided by my wife Fay and Bill Sabin and
the excellent McGraw-Hill staff.
William J. O'Neu

How to Make
Money in
Stocks

PART l
A Winning
System:
C-A-N S-L-I-M

Introduction:
Learning from the Greatest
Winners
In the following chapters, I will show you exactly how to pick more big
winners in the stock market and how to substantially reduce your losses
and mistakes. I will examine and discuss other Investments, äs well.
In the past, most people who bought and sold Stocks either had
mediocre results or lost money because of their clear lack of knowledge.
But no one has to lose money.
This book will provide you with most of the investment understand-
ing, skills, and methods you need to become a more successful Investor.
I believe that most people in this country and many others through-
out the free world, young and old, regardless of profession, education,
background, or economic position, can and defmitely should own com-
mon stock. This book isn't written for an elite but for the millions of lit-
tle guys and gals everywhere who want a chance to be better off.
YOU CAN
START SMALL
If you are a typical working man or woman or a
beginning Investor, it doesn't take a lot of
money to Start. You can begin with äs little äs
$500 to $1000 and add to it äs you earn and
save more money. I began with the purchase
of just five shares of Procter & Gamble when
I was only 21 and fresh out of school.
You live in a fantastic tinie of unlimited opportunity, an era of out-
standing new ideas, emerging industries, and new frontiers. But you
have to read to learn how to recognize and take advantage of these
extraordinary Situation«.
Introduction
The opportunities are out there for everyone. You are now witnessing
a New America. We lead the world in high technology, medical
advancements, Computer Software, military capabilities, and innovative
new entrepreneurial companies. The communist socialist System was
finally relegated to the ash heap of history under Ronald Reagan and
our System of freedom and opportunity serves äs a prime success model
for the majority of countries in the world.
It is not enough today to just work and earn a salary. To do the things
you want to do, to go the places you want to go, to have the things you
want to have in your life, you absolutely must save and invest intelligent-
ly. The second income from your Investments and the net profits you
can make will help you reach your goals and provide real security.
SECRET TIP #1
The first Step in learning to pick stock market
winners is for you to examine leading winners
of the past to learn all the characteristics of the
most successful Stocks. You will learn from this
observation what type of price patterns these
Stocks developed just before their spectacular
price advances.
Other key factors you will uncover include what kind of Company
quarterly-earnings reports were publicly known at the time, what the
annual earnings histories of these organizations had been in the prior
five years, what amount of stock trading volume was present, what
degree of relative price strength occurred in the price of the Stocks
before their enormous success, how many shares of common stock were
outstanding in the capitalization of each Company, how many of the
greatest winners had significant new products or new management, and
how many were tied to strong industry group moves caused by impor-
tant changes occurring in an entire industry.
It is easy to conduct this type of practical, commonsense analysis of
past successful leaders. I have already completed such a comprehensive
study. In our historical analysis, we selected the greatest winning Stocks
in the stock market each year (in terms of percentage increase for the
year), spanning more than 40 years.
We call the study The Record Book of Greatest Stock Market Winners.
It covers the period from 1953 through 1993 and analyzes in detail over
500 of the biggest winning companies in recent stock market history:
super Stocks such äs Texas Instruments, whose price soared from $25 to
$250 from January 1958 through May 1960; Xerox, which escalated
from $160 to the equivalent of $1340 from March 1963 to June 1966;

A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
Syntex, which leaped from $100 to $570 in only six rnonths during the
last half of 1963; Dome Petroleum and Prime Computer, which respec-
tively advanced 1000% and 1595% in the 1978-1980 stock market;
Limited Stores, which wildly excited lucky shareowners with a 3500%
increase between 1982 and 1987; and Cisco Systems, which advanced
from a split-adjusted $1.88 to $40.75 between October 1990 and March
1994. Home Depot and Microsoft both increased more than 20 times
during the 1980s and early '90s. Home Depot was one of the all-time
great performers jumping twentyfold in less than 2 years from its initial
public offering in September of 1981 and then again climbing another
10 times from 1988 to 1992. All of these companies offered exciting
new products and concepts.
Would you like to know the common characteristics and secret rules
of success we discovered from this intensive study of all past glamorous
stock market leaders?
It's all in the next few chapters and in a simple easy-to-remember for-
mula we have named C-A-N S-L-I-M. Write the formula down, and
repeat it several times so you won't forget it.
Each letter in the words C-A-N S-L-I-M Stands for one of the seven
chief characteristics of these great winning Stocks at their early develop-
ing stages, just before they made huge profits for their shareholders.
You can learn how to pick winners in the stock market, and you can
become part owner in the best companies in the world. So, let's get
started right now. Here's a sneak preview of C-A-N S-L-I-M.
C 
= Current Quarterly Earnings Per Share: How Much Is Enough?
A 
= Aimual Earnings Increases: Look for Meaiiingful Growth.
N 
= New Products, New Management, New Highs: Buying at the Right Time.
S 
= Supply and Demand: Small Capitalization Plus Volume Demand.
L 
= Leader or Laggard: Which Is Your Stock?
I 
= Institutional Sponsorship: A Little Goes a Long Way.
M 
= Market Direction: How to Determine It?
Please begin immediately with Chapter 1.
l
C = Current Quarterly Earnings
Per Share:
How Much Is Enough?
M/A-Com Inc.
Humana Inc.
Kirby Exploration Co.
What did shares of the above-mentioned microwave component man-
ufacturer, hospital operator, and oil Service Company have in common?
From 1977 to 1981, they all posted price run-ups surpassing 900%.
In scrutinizing these and other past stock market superstars, I've
found a number of other similarities äs well.
For example, tradiiig volume in these sensational winners swelled
substantially before their giant price moves began. The winning Stocks
also tended to shuffle around in price consolidation periods for a few
months before they broke out and soared. But one key variable stood
out from all the rest in importance: the profits of nearly every outstand-
ing stock were booming.
The common Stocks you select for purchase should show a major per-
centage increase in the current quarterly earnings per share (the most
recently reported quarter) when compared to the prior year's same
quarter.
Earnings per share are calculated by dividing a company's total after-
tax profits by the company's number of common shares outstanding.
The percentage increase in earnings per share is the single most impor-
tant element in stock selection today.
The greater the percentage of increase, the better, äs long äs you

6 
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
aren't misled by comparing current earnings to nearly nonexistent
earnings for the year earlier quarter, like 1 cent a share.
Ten cents per share versus one cent may be a 900% increase, but it is
definitely distorted and not as meaningful as $1 versus $.50. The 100%
increase of $1 versus $.50 is not overstated by comparison to an unusu-
ally low number in the year ago quarter.
I am continually amazed at how many professional pension fund
managers, as well as individual investors, buy common stocks with the
current reported quarter's earnings flat (no change), or even worse,
down. There is absolutely no reason for a stock to go anywhere if the
current earnings are poor.
Even if the present quarter's earnings are up 5% to 10%, that is sim-
ply not enough of an improvement to fuel any significant upward price
movement in a stock. It is also easier for a corporation currently show-
ing a mere increase of 7% or 8% to suddenly report lower earnings the
next quarter.
Seek Stocks Showing Big
Current Earnings Incrcascs
In our models of the 500 best performing Stocks in the 40 years from
1953 through 1993, three out of four of these securities showed earn-
ings iricreases averaging rnore than 70% in the latest publicly reported
quarter before the Stocks began their major price advance. The one out
of four that didn't show solid current quarter increases did so in the
very next quarter, and those increases averaged 90%!
If the best Stocks had profit increases of this magnitude before they
advanced rapidly in price, why should you settle for mediocre or down
earnings?
Our study showed that among all big gainers between 1970 and 1982,
86% reported higher earnings in their most recently published quarter,
and 76% were up over 10%. The median earnings increase was 34%
and the rnean (average) was up 90%.
You may find that only about 2% of all Stocks listed for trading on the
New York or American stock exchanges will, at any one time, show
increases of this proportion in current quarterly net iiicome.
But, remember you want to find the exceptional Stocks rather than
the lackluster ones, so set your sights high and Start looking for the
superior Stocks, the small number of real leaders. They are there.
Success is built on dreanis and ideas; however, it helps to know exact-
ly what you're looking for. Before you Start your search for tomorrow's
super stock market leader, let nie teil you about a few of the traps and
ni t falls.
C = Current Quarterly Earnings Per Share
Watch Out for Misleading
Reports of Earnings
Have you ever read a corporation's quarterly earnings report that stated,
"We had a terrible first three months. Prospects for our Company are turn-
ing down due to inefficiencies in the home office. Our competition just
came out with a better product, which will adversely affect our sales.
Furthermore, we are losing our shirt on the new midwestern Operation,
which was a real blunder on management's part."
No! Here's what you see. "Greatshakes Corporation reports record sales
of $7.2 million versus $6 million (+ 20%) for the quarter ended March
31." If you own their stock, this is wonderful news. You certainly are not
going to be disappointed. You think this is a fine Company (otherwise you
wouldn't own its stock), and the report confirms your thinking.
Is this record-breaking sales armouncement a good report? Let's sup-
pose the Company also had record earnings of $2.10 per share of stock for
the quarter. Is it even better now?
What if the $2.10 was versus $2 (+ 5%) per share in the same quarter
the previous year? Why were sales up 20% and earnings ahead only 5%?
Something might be wrong—rnaybe the company's profit margins are
crumbling. At any rate, if you own the stock, you should be concerned and
evaluate the Situation closely to see why the earnings increased only 5%.
Most investors are impressed with what they read, and companies love
to put their best foot forward. Even though this corporation may have had
all-time record sales, up 20%, it didn't mean much. You must be able to
see through slanted published presentations if you want the vital facts.
The key factor for the winning investor must always be how much the
current quarter's earnings are up in percentage terms from the same quar-
ter the year before!
Let's say your Company discloses that sales climbed 10% and net income
advanced 12%. This sounds good, but you shouldn't be concerned with
the company's total net income. You don't own the whole organization.
You own shares of stock in the corporation. Perhaps the Company issued
additional shares or there was other dilution of the common stock. Just
because sales and total net income for the Company were up, the report
still may not be favorable. Maybe earnings per share of common stock
inched up only 2% or 3%.
Break Down Six or Nine
Month Earnings into Quarterly
Percentage Changes
Suppose your Company announces that earnings for the six months that

8
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
earlier (+ 25%). Your "pet" stock inust be in great shape. You couldn't
ask for better results—or could you?
Beware. The Company reported earnings for six months. What did
the stock earn in the last quarter, the three months ended in June?
Maybe in the first quarter ended in March the stock earned $1.60 per
share versus $1 (+ 60%). What does this leave for the last quarter ended
June 30? Ninety cents versus one dollar. This is a terrible report, even
though the way it was presented to you sounded terrific.
If you own common stock in a Company whose earnings had been up
60% and they came out with a Statement of $.90 versus $1 (down 10%),
you had better wake up. The outfit might be deteriorating.
You can't always assume that because an earnings report appears to
be rosy, everything is fine. You have to look deeper and not accept the
reassuring manner of corporate news releases reported in your favorite
newspaper.
Many times, earnings declarations are published for the most recent
nine months. This teils you nothing, and all too ofteii it masks serious
weakness in the numbers that really count. The first quarter may have
been up 30%, the second quarter up 10%, and the last quarter off 10%.
By always breaking down the figures to show the quarter-by-quarter
earnings, you will be able to see a completely different picture and
trend.
Omit a Company's One-Time
Extraordinary Gains
The last important trap the winning Investor should sidestep is being
influenced by nonrecurring profits.
If an organization that manufactures Computers reports earnings for
the last quarter that include profits from the sale of real estate or a
plant, for example, that pari of the earnings should be subtracted from
the report. Those are one-time, nonrecurring earnings and are not rep-
resentative of the true, ongoing profitability of corporate operations.
Ignore them.
Set a Minimum Level for
Current Earnings Increases
As a general guide for new or experienced investors, I would suggest
you not buy any stock that doesn't show earnings per share up at hast
18% or 20% in the most recent quarter versus the same quarter the
C = Current Quarterly Earnings Per Share
year before. Many successful money-makers use 25% or 30% äs their
minimum earnings parameter. And make sure you calculate the per-
centage change; don't guess or assume. You will be even safer if you
insist the last two quarters each show a significant percentage increase
in earnings from year-ago quarters.
During bull markets, I prefer to concentrate in equities (comrnon
Stocks) that show powerful current earnings leaping 40% or 50% up to
500%. Why not buy the very best merchandise available?
If you want to further sharpen your stock selection process, before
you buy, look ahead to the next quarter or two and check the earnings
that were reported for those same quarters the previous year. See if the
Company will be coming up against unusually large or small earnings
achieved a year ago.
In some instances, where the unusual year-earlier earnings are not
due to seasonal factors (the December quarter is always big for retailers,
for example), this procedure may help you anticipate a strong or poor
earnings report due ahead in the coming months.
Many individuals and institutions alike buy Stocks with earnings down
in the most recently reported quarter just because they like a Company
and think the stock's price is cheap. Usually they accept a story that
earnings will rebound strongly in the near future.
While this may be true in some cases (it frequently isn't), the main
point is that at any time in the market, you have the choice of investing
in at least 5000 or more Stocks. You don't have to accept promises of
something that may never occur when alternative investments are actu-
ally showing current earnings advancing strongly.
The Debate on Overemphasis
of Current Earnings
Recently it has been noted that Japanese firms concentrate more on
longer-term profits rather than on trying to maximize current earnings
per share.
This is a sound concept and one the better-managed organizations in
the United States (a minority of companies) also follow. That is how
well-managed entities create colossal quarterly earnings increases, by
spending several years on research, developing superior new products,
and cutting costs.
But don't be confused. You äs an individual Investor can afford to wait
until the point in time when a Company positively proves to you its
efforts have been successful and are starting to actually show real earn-
insrs increases.

10
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-l-M
Requiring that current quarterly earnings be up a hefty amount is just
another smart way the intelligent Investor can reduce the risk of exces-
sive mistakes in stock selection.
Many corporations have mediocre management that continually pro-
duces second-rate earnings results. I call them the "entrenched main-
tainers." These are the companies you want to avoid until someone has
the courage to change top management. Ironically, these are generally
the companies that strain to pump up their current earnings a dull 8%
or 10%. True growth companies with outstanding new products do not
have to maximize current results.
Look for Accelerating
Quarterly Earnings Growth
My studies of thousands of the most successful concerns in America
proved that virtually every corporate stock with an outstanding upward
price move showed accelerated quarterly earnings increases some time
in the previous ten quarters before the towering price advance began.
Therefore, what is crucial is not just that earnings are up or that a
certain price-to-earnings ratio (a stock's price divided by its last twelve
months' earnings per share) exists; it is the change and improvement
from the stock's prior percentage rate of earning increases that causes a
supreme price surge. Wall Street now calls these earnings surprises.
I once mentioned this concept of earnings acceleration to Peter
Vermilye, the former head of Citicorp's Trust Investment Division in
New York City. He liked the term and feit it was much more accurate
and relevant than the phrase "earnings momentum" sometimes used by
Investment professionals.
If a Company's earnings are up 15% a year and suddenly begin spurt-
ing 40% to 50% a year, it usually creates the basic conditions for impor-
tant stock price improvement.
Two Quarters of Major
Earnings Deceleration May
Mean Trouble
Likewise, when the rate of earnings growth Starts to slow and begins
meaningful deceleration (for instance, a 50% rate of increase suddenly
decreases to only 15% for a couple quarters), the security probably has
either topped out permanently, regardless of what analysts and Wall
o..„_. „,„., „„„ „r tv,p r^tf, Of nr)warc[ orogress will dwindle into a
C = Current Quarterly Earnings Per Share
11
lengthy and unrewarding price consolidation period characterized by
prolonged sideways movement.
I prefer to see two quarters of material slowdown before turning neg-
ative on a company's earnings since the best of organizations can peri-
odically have one slow quarter.
Consult Log Scale
Weekly Graphs
One reason that logarithmic scale graphs are of such great value in
security analysis is that acceleration or deceleration in the percentage
rate of quarterly earnings increases can be seen very clearly on a log
graph.
Log graphs show percentage changes accurately, since one inch any-
where on the price or earnings scale represents the same percentage
change. This is not true of arithmetically scaled charts.
For example, a 100% stock price increase from $10 to $20 a share
would show the same space change äs a 50% increase from $20 to $30 a
share on an arithmetically scaled chart. A log graph, however, would
show the 100% increase äs twice äs large äs the 50% increase.
The principle of earnings acceleration or deceleration is essential to
understand.
Fundamental security analysts who recommend Stocks because of an
absolute level of earnings expected for the following year could be look-
ing at the wrong set of facts. A stock that earned $5 per share and
expects to report $6 the next year can mislead you unless you know the
previous trend in the percentage rate of earnings change.
Arithmetic price scale

12
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
To say the security is undervalued just because it is selling at a certain
price-earnings ratio or because it is in the low range of its historical P/E
ratio is also usually nonsense unless primary consideration has first
been given to whether the momentum and rate of change in earnings is
substantially increasing or decreasing.
Perhaps this partially explains who so few public or institutional
investors, such as banks and insurance companies, make worthwhile
money following the buy-and-sell recommendations of most securities ana-
lysts.
You, as a do-it-yourself investor, can take the latest quarterly earnings
per share, add them to the prior three quarters' earnings of a company,
and plot the amounts on a logarithmic scale graph. The plotting of the
most recent twelve-month earnings each quarter should, in the best
companies, put the earnings per share close to or already at new highs.
Check Other Key Stocks in
the Group
For added safety, it is wise to check the industry group of your stock.
You should be able to find at least one other noteworthy stock in the
industry also showing good current earnings. This acts as a confirming
factor. If you cannot find any other impressive stock in the group dis-
playing strong earnings, the chances are greater that you have selected
the wrong investment.
Note the date when a company expects to report its next quarterly
earnings. One to four weeks prior to the report's release, a stock fre-
quently displays unusual price strength or weakness, or simply "hesitates"
C = Current Quarterly Earnings Per Share
13
while the market and other equities in the same group advance. This
could give you an early clue of an approaching good or bad report. You
may also want to be aware and suspicious of stocks that have gone several
weeks beyond estimated reporting time without the release of an earn-
ings announcement.
Where to Find Current
Corporate Earnings Reports
New quarterly corporate earnings statements are published every day in
the financial section of your local paper, in Investor's Business Daily, and
in The Wall Street Journal. Investor's Business Daily separates all new
earnings reports into companies with "up" earnings and those disclosing
"down" results so you can easily see who produced excellent gains.
Which earnings report do you think is best?
Chart services published weekly also show earnings reported during
the prior week as well as the most recent earnings figures for every stock
they chart.
One last point to clarify: You should always compare a stock's per-
centage increase in earnings for the quarter ended December, to the
December quarter a year earlier. Never compare the December quarter
to the immediately prior September quarter.
You now have the first critical rule for improving your stock selection:
Current quarterly earnings per share should be up a major percentage
(at least 20% to 50% or more) over the same quarter last year. The best ones
might show earnings up 100% to 500%! A mediocre 8% or 10% isn't
enough! In picking winning stocks, it's the bottom line that counts.

2
A = Annual Earnings Increases;
Look for Meaningful Growth
If you want to own part of a business in your home town, do you
choose a steadily growing, successful concern or one that is unsuccess-
ful, not growing and highly cyclical?
Most of you would prefer a business that is showing profitable growth.
That's exactly what you should look for in common stocks. Each
year's annual earnings per share for the last five years should show an
increase over the prior year's earnings. You might accept one year
being down in the last five as long as the following year's earnings
quickly recover and move back to new high ground.
It is possible that a stock could earn $4 a share one year, $5 the next
year, $6 the next, and the following year—$2. If the next annual earn-
ings statement were $2.50 versus the prior year's $2 (+ 25%), that would
not be a good report. The only reason it may seem attractive is that the
previous year ($2) was so depressed any improvement would look good.
In any case, the profit recovery is slow and is still substantially below the
company's peak earnings of $6:
Select Stocks with 25% to
50% Annual Growth Rates
Owning common stock is just the same as being a part owner in a busi-
ness. And who wants to own part of an establishment showing no growth?
The annual compounded growth rate of earnings in the superior firms
you hand pick for purchasing stock in should be from 25% to 50%, or
even 100% or more, per year over the last 4 or 5 years.
Between 1970 and 1982, the average annual compounded earnings
A = Annual Earnings Increases
15
growth rate of all outstanding performing stocks at their early emerging
stage was 24%. The median, or most common, growth rate was 21% per
year, and three out of four of the prominent winners revealed at least
some positive annual growth rate over the five years preceding the giant
increase in the value of the stock. One out of four were turnarounds.
A typical successful yearly earnings per share growth progression for a
company's latest five-year period might look something like $.70, $1.15,
$1.85, $2.80, $4.
The earnings estimate for the next year should also be up a healthy
percentage; the greater the percentage, the better. However, remember
estimates are opinions. Opinions may be wrong whereas actual reported
earnings are facts that are ordinarily more dependable.
What Is a Normal Stock
Market Cycle?
Most bull (up) market cycles last two to four years and are followed by a
recession or bear (down) market and eventually another bull market in
common stocks.
In the beginning phase of a new bull market, growth stocks are usual-
ly the first sector to lead the market and make new price highs. Heavy
basic industry groups such as steel, chemical, paper, rubber, and
machinery are commonly more laggard followers.
Young growth stocks will usually dominate for at least two bull market
cycles. Then the emphasis may change for the next cycle, or a short
period, to turnaround or cyclical stocks or newly improved sectors of
the market, such as consumer growth stocks, over-the-counter growth
issues, or defense stocks that sat on the sidelines in the previous cycle.
Last year's bloody bums become next year's heroes. Chrysler and
Ford were two such spirited turnaround plays in 1982. Cyclical and
turnaround opportunities led in the market waves of 1953—1955,
1963-1965, arid 1974-1975. Papers, aluminums, autos, chemicals, and
plastics returned to the fore in 1987. Yet, even in these periods, there
were some pretty dramatic young growth stocks available. Basic industry
stocks in the United States frequently represent older, more inefficient
industries, some of which are no longer internationally competitive and
growing. This is perhaps not the area of America's future excellence.
Cyclical stocks' price moves tend to be more short-lived when they do
occur, and these stocks are much more apt to suddenly falter and
encounter disappointing quarterly earnings reports. Even in the stretch
where you decide to buy strong turnaround situations, the annual com-
pounded growth rate could, in many cases, be 5% to 10%.

16
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
Requiring a company to show two consecutive quarters of sharp earn-
ings recovery should put the earnings for the latest twelve months into,
or very near, new high ground. If the 12 months earnings line is shown
on a chart, the sharper the upswing the better. This will make it possi-
ble in many cases for even the "old dog" about-face stock to show some
annual growth rate for the prior five-year time period. Sometimes one
quarter of earnings turnaround will suffice if the earnings upswing is so
dramatic that it puts the 12 months ended earnings line into new highs.
Check the Stability of a
Company's Five-Year
Earnings Record
While the percentage rate of increase in earnings is most important, an
additional factor of value, which we helped pioneer in the measure-
ment and use of, is the stability and consistency of the past five years'
earnings. We display the number differently than most statisticians do.
Our stability measurements are expressed on a scale from 1 to 99.
The lower the figure, the more stable the past earnings record. The fig-
ures are ca^ulated by plotting quarterly earnings for the last five years
and fitting a trend line around the plot points to determine the degree
of deviation from the basic earnings trend.
Growth stocks with good stability of earnings tend to show a stability
figure below 20 or 25. Equities with a stability rating over 30 are more
cyclical and a little less dependable in their growth. All other things
being equal, you may want to choose the security showing a greater
degree of consistency and stability in past earnings growth.
Earnings stability numbers are usually shown immediately after a
company's five-year growth rate, although most analysts and investment
services do not bother to make the calculation.
EARNINGS GROWTH RATE (STABILITY) RANK
1983-87
1981-85
1979-83
+ 31%
+ 19%
+ 19%
( 6)
( «)
(")
Earning* stability rank
If you primarily restrict your selections to ventures with proven
growth records, you avoid the hundreds of investments having erratic
earnings histories or a cyclical recovery in profits that may top out as
they approach earnings peaks of the prior cycle.
A = Annual Earnings Increases
17
How to Weed Out the Losers
in a Group
When you investigate a specific industry group, using the five-year
growth criteria will also help you weed out 80% of the stocks in an
industry. This is because the majority of companies in an industry have
lackluster growth rates or no growth.
When Xerox was having its super performance of 700% growth from
March 1963 to June 1966, its earnings growth rate averaged 32% per
year. Wal-Mart Stores, a discount retailer, sported an annual growth
rate from 1977 to 1990 of 43% and boomed in price an incredible
11,200%. Cisco Systems growth rate in October 1990 was an enormous
257% per year and Microsoft's was 99% in October 1986, both before
their long advances.
The fact that an investment possesses a good five-year growth record
doesn't necessarily cause it to be labeled a growth stock. Ironically, in
fact, some companies called growth stocks are producing a substantially
slower rate of growth than they did in several earlier market eras. These
should usually be. avoided. Their record is more like a fully matured or
nearly senile growth stock. Older and larger organizations frequently
show slow growth.
New Cycles Create New
Leaders
Each soaring new cycle in the stock market will catapult fresh leader-
ship stocks to the attention of the market, some of which will begin to
be called growth stocks. The growth record in itself, however, is only a
starting point for would-be victorious investors, and it should be the
first of many earnings measurements you should check.
For example, companies with outstanding five-year growth records of
30% per year but whose current earnings in the last two quarters have
slowed significantly to + 15% and + 10% should be avoided in most
instances.
Insist on Both Annual and
Current Quarterly Earnings
Being Excellent
We prefer to see current quarterly earnings accelerating or at least main-
taining the trend of several past quarters. A standout stock needs a

18
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
sound growth record during recent years but also needs a strong current
earnings record in the last few quarters. It is the unique combination of
these two critical factors, rather than one or the other being outstanding,
that creates a superb stock, or at least one that has a higher chance of
true success.
Investor's Business Daily provides a relative earnings ranking (based
on the latest five-year annual earnings record and recent quarterly earn-
ings reports) for all common stocks shown in the daily NYSE, AMEX,
and OTC stock price quotation tables.
More than 6000 stocks are compared against each other and ranked on
a scale from 1 to 99. An 80 earnings per share rank means a company's
current and five-year historical earnings record outclassed 80% of all
other companies.
The earnings record of a corporation is the most critical, fundamental
factor available for selecting potential winning stocks.
Arc Price-Earnings Ratios
Important?
Now that we've discussed the indispensable importance of a stock's cur-
rent quarterly earnings record and annual earnings increases in the last
five years, you may be wondering about a stock's price-to-earnings
(P/E) ratio. How important is it in selecting stocks? Prepare yourself for
a bubble-bursting surprise.
P/E ratios have been used for years by analysts as their basic measure-
ment tool in deciding if a stock is undervalued (has a low P/E) and
should be bought or is overvalued (has a high P/E) and should be sold.
Factual analysis of each cycle's winning stocks shows that P/E ratios
have very little to do with whether a stock should be bought or not. A
stock's P/E ratio is not normally an important cause of the most suc-
cessful stock moves.
Our model book studies proved the percentage increase in earnings
per share was substantially more crucial than the P/E ratio as a cause of
impressive stock performance.
During the 33 years from 1953 through 1985 the average P/E for the
best performing stocks at their early emerging stage was 20 (the Dow
IFRANKLIN RES INC
3.494.000 SHARES 
-97% ANNUAL EPS GROWTH
LAST QTR EPS -115%, PRIOR QTR EPS -150%
Profile of a standout stock
A = Annual Earnings Increases
19
Jones Industrial's P/E at the same time averaged 15). While advancing,
these stocks expanded their P/Es to approximately 45 (125% expansion
of P/E ratio).
Why You Missed Some
Fabulous Stocks!
While these figures are merely averages, they do strongly imply that if
you were not willing to pay an average of 20 to 30 times earnings for
growth stocks in the 40 years through 1993, you automatically eliminat-
ed most of the best investments available!
P/Es were higher on average from 1953 to 1970 and lower between
1970 and 1982. From 1974 through 1982, the average beginning P/E
was 15 and expanded to 31 at the stock's top. P/Es of winning stocks
during this period tended to be only slightly higher than the general
market's P/E at the beginning of a stock's price advance.
High P/Es were found to occur because of bull markets. With the
exception of cyclical stocks, low P/Es generally occurred because of bear
markets. Some OTC growth stocks may also display lower P/Es if the
stocks are not yet widely owned by institutional investors.
Don't buy a stock solely because the P/E ratio looks cheap. There
usually are good reasons why it is cheap, and there is no golden rule in
the marketplace that a stock which sells at eight or ten times earnings
cannot eventually sell at four or five times earnings. Many years ago,
when I was first beginning to study the market, I bought Northrop at
four times earnings and in disbelief watched the outfit decline to two
times earnings.
How Price-Earnings Ratios
Are Misused
Many Wall Street analysts inspect the historical high and low price-earn-
ings ratios of a stock and feel intoxicating magic in the air when a secu-
rity sells in the low end of its historical P/E range. Stocks are frequently
recommended by researchers when this occurs, or when the price starts
to drop, because then the P/E declines and the stock appears to be a
bargain.
Much of this kind of analysis is based on questionable personal opin-
ions or theories handed down through the years by academicians and
some analysts. Many "green" newcomers to the stock market use the

20
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
faulty method of selecting stock investments based chiefly 011 low P/E
ratios and go wrong more often than not.
This system of analysis often ignores far more basic trends. For exam-
ple, the general market may have topped out, in which case all stocks are
headed lower and it is ridiculous to say "Electronic Gizmo" is underval-
ued because it was 22 times earnings and can now be bought for 15 times
earnings. The market break of 1987 hurt many value buyers.
The Wrong Way to Analyze
Companies in an Industry
Another common, poor use of price-earnings ratios by both amateurs
and professionals alike is to evaluate the stocks in an industry and con-
clude that the one selling at the cheapest P/E is always undervalued
and is therefore, the most attractive purchase. This is usually the com-
pany with the most ghastly earnings record, and that's precisely why it
sells at the lowest P/E.
The simple truth is that stocks at any one time usually sell near their
current value. So the stock which sells at 20 times earnings is there for
one set of reasons, and the stock that trades for 15 times earnings is
there for other reasons the market already has analyzed. The one sell-
ing for seven times is at seven times because its overall record is more
deficient. Everything sells for about what it is worth at the time.
If a company's price level and price-earnings ratio changes in the
near future, it is because conditions, events, psychology, and earnings
continue to improve or suddenly start to deteriorate as the weeks and
months pass.
Eventually a stock's P/E will reach its ultimate high point, but this
normally is because the general market averages are peaking and start-
ing an important decline, or the stock definitely is beginning to lose its
earnings growth.
High P/E stocks can be more volatile, particularly if they are in the
high-tech area. The price of a high P/E stock can also get temporarily
ahead of itself, but so can the price of low P/E stocks.
Some High P/Es That Were
Cheap
It should be remembered that in a few captivating smaller-company
growth situations that have revolutionary new product breakthroughs,
high P/E ratios can actually be low. Xerox sold for 100 times earnings
A = Annual Earnings Increases
21
in 1960—before it advanced 3300% in price (from a split-adjusted price
of $5 to $170). Syntex sold for 45 times earnings in July 1963, before it
advanced 400%. Genentech was priced at 200 times earnings in the
over-the-counter market in early November 1985, and it bolted 300% in
the next five months. All had fantastic new products.
Don't Sell High P/E Stocks
Short
When the stock market was at rock bottom in June 1962, a big, heavyset
Beverly Hills investor barged into the office of a broker friend of mine
and in a loud voice shouted Xerox was drastically overpriced because it
was selling for 50 times earnings. He sold 2000 shares short at $88.
After he sold short this "obviously overpriced stock," it immediately
started advancing and ultimately reached a price equal to $1300 before
adjusting for stock splits. So much for amateur opinions about P/E
ratios being too high. Investors' personal opinions are generally wrong;
markets seldom are.
Some institutional research firms in recent years published services
and analyses based on the principle of relative P/E ratios for compa-
nies, compared to individual company earnings growth rates. Our
detailed research over many cycles has shown these types of studies to
be misleading and of little practical value.
The conclusion we have reached from years of in-depth research into
winning corporations is that the percentage increase and acceleration
in earnings per share is more important than the level of the stock's
P/E ratio. At any rate, it may be easier to spot emerging new trends
than to accurately assess correct valuation levels.
In summary: Concentrate on stocks with a proven record of signifi-
cant annual earnings growth in the last five years. Don't accept excuses;
insist the annual earnings increases plus strong recent quarterly earn-
ings improvements be there.

3
N = New Products,
New Management,
New Highs:
Buying at the Right Time
It takes something new to produce a startling advance in the price of
a stock.
This something new can be an important new product or service, sell-
ing rapidly and causing earnings to accelerate above previous rates of
increase. It could also be new top management in a company during
the last couple of years. A new broom sweeps clean, or at least may
bring inspiring ideas and vigor to the ball game.
Or the new event could be substantial changes within the company's
industry. Industrywide shortages, price increases, or new technology
could affect almost all members of the industry group in a positive way.
New Products That Created
Super Successes
1. Rexall's new Tupperware division, in 1958, helped push the com-
pany's stock to $50 a share, from $16.
2. Thiokol in 1957-1959 came out with new rocket fuels for missiles,
propelling its stock from $48 to the equivalent of $355.
3. Syntex, in 1963, marketed the oral contraceptive pill. In six months
the stock soared from $100 to $550.
4. McDonald's, in 1967-1971, with low-priced fast food franchising,
snowballed into an 1100% profit for stockholders.
5. Levitz Furniture stock increased 660% in 1970-1971, with the pop-
ularity of their giant warehouse discount furniture centers.
N = New Products, New Management, New Highs
23
6. Houston Oil & Gas, in 1972-1973, with a major new oil field ran up
968% in 61 weeks and later in 1976 picked up another 367%.
7. Computervision stock advanced 1235% in 1978-1980, with the
introduction of new Cad-Cam factory automation equipment.
8. Wang Labs Class B stock grew 1350% in 1978-1980, due to the cre-
ation of their new word-processing office machines.
9. Price Company stock shot up more than 15 times in 1982-1986
with the opening of a southern California chain of innovative
wholesale warehouse membership stores.
10. Amgen developed two successful new biotech drugs, Epogen and
Neupogen, and the stock raced ahead from 60% in 1990 to the
equivalent of 460% in January 1992.
11. Cisco Systems, another California company, created routers and
networking equipment that allowed company links with geographi-
cally dispersed local area computer networks. The stock advanced
over 2000% in 3V2 years.
12. International Game Technology rose an astounding 1600% in
1991-1993 with new microprocessor-based gaming products.
In our study of greatest stock market winners from 1953 through
1993, we discovered more than 95% of these stunning successes in
American industry either had a major new product or service, new man-
agement, or an important change for the better in the conditions of
their particular industry.
The Stock Market's Great
Paradox
There is another fascinating phenomenon we found in the early stage
of all winning stocks. We call it "the great paradox." Before I tell you
what this last new observation is, I want you to look at three typical
stocks shown on the next page. Which one looks like the best buy to
you? Which stock would you probably avoid?
Among the thousands of individual investors attending my investment
lectures in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, 98% said they do not buy stocks
that are making new highs in price.
The staggering majority of individual investors, whether new or expe-
rienced, feel delightful comfort in buying stocks that are down substan-
tially from their peaks.

Stock A
Stock B
Stock C
Which stock looks like the best buy?
25
I have provided extensive research for over 600 institutional investors
in the United States. It is my experience that most institutional money
managers are also bottom buyers—they, too, feel safer buying stocks
that look cheap because they're either down a lot in price or selling
near their lows.
The hard-to-accept great paradox in the stock market is that what
seems too high and risky to the majority usually goes higher and what
seems low and cheap usually goes lower. Haven't you seen this happen
before?
In case you find this supposed "high-altitude" method a little difficult
to boldly act upon, let me cite another study we conducted. An analysis
was made of the daily newspapers' new-high and new-low stock lists dur-
ing several good, as well as poor, market periods.
Our findings were simple. Stocks on the new-high list tended to go
higher, and those on the new-low list tended to go lower.
Put another way, a stock listed in the financial section's new-low list of
common stocks is usually a pretty poor prospect, whereas a stock mak-
ing the new-high list the first time during a bull market and accompa-
nied by a big increase in trading volume might be a red-hot prospect
worth checking into. Decisive investors should be out of a stock long
before it appears on the new-low list.
You may have guessed by now what the last intriguing new realization
is that I promised to disclose to you earlier. So here are the three stocks
you had to choose among on the previous page, Stock A, Stock B, and
Stock C. Which one did you pick? Stock A (Syntex Corp, see below) was
the right one to buy. The small arrow pointing down above the weekly
prices in July 1963 shows the same buy point at the end of Stock A in
July on the previous page. Stock B and Stock C both declined.
Stock A
ADJUSTED FOR
A 3:1 SPLIT
+ 400% in >U month* from July 1963
N - New Products;' New Management, New Highs

26
A Winmng System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
Stock B
- 42% in six months from August
Stock C
u.
- 21% in five months from March
When to Correctly Begin
Buying a Stock
A stock should be close to or actually making a new high in price after
undergoing a price correction and consolidation. The consolidation
(base-building period) in price could normally last anywhere from seven
or eight weeks up to fifteen months.
As the stock emerges from its price adjustment phase, slowly resumes
an uptrend, and is approaching new high ground, this is, believe it or
not, the correct time to consider buying. The stock should be bought
just as it's starting to break out of its price base.
You must avoid buying once the stock is extended more than 5% or
N = New Products, New Management, New Highs
27
10% from the exact buy point off the base. Here is an example of the
proper time to have bought Reebok, at $29, in February 1986 before it
zoomed 260%. The second graph shows the correct time to have bought
Amgen at $60—in March 1990—before it jumped more than sixfold.
392% increase in 13 months
681% increase in 22 months
How Does a Stock Go from
$50 to $100?
As a final appeal to your trusty common sense and judgment, it should
be stated that if a security has traded between $40 and $50 a share over
many months and is now selling at $50 and is going to double in price,
it positively must first go through $51, $52, $53, $54, $55, and the like,
before it can reach $100.
Therefore, your job is to buy when a stock looks high to the majority
of conventional investors and to sell after it moves substantially higher
and finally begins to look attractive to some of those same investors.

28
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
In conclusion: Search for corporations that have a key new product
or service, new management, or changes in conditions in their industry.
And most importantly, companies whose stocks are emerging from
price consolidation patterns and are close to, or actually touching, new
highs in price are usually your best buy candidates. There will always be
something new occurring in America every year. In 1993 alone, there
were nearly 1,000 initial public offerings. Dynamic, innovative new com-
panies—a bundle of future, potential big winners.
4
S = Supply and Demand:
Small Capitalization
Plus Big Volume Demand
The law of supply and demand determines the price of almost every-
thing in your daily life. When you go to the grocery store and buy fresh
lettuce, tomatoes, eggs, or beef, supply and demand affects the price.
The law of supply and demand even impacted the price of food and
consumer goods in former Communist, dictator-controlled countries
where these state-owned items were always in short supply and frequently
available only to the privileged class of higher officials in the bureaucracy
or in the black market to comrades who could pay exorbitant prices.
The stock market does not escape this basic price principle. The law
of supply and demand is more important than all the analyst opinions
on Wall Street.
Big Is Not Always Better
The price of a common stock with 300 million shares outstanding is
hard to budge up because of the large supply of stock available. A
tremendous volume of buying (demand) is needed to create a rousing
price increase.
On the other hand, if a company has only 2 or 3 million shares of
common stock outstanding, a reasonable amount of buying can push
the stock up rapidly because of the small available supply.
If you are choosing between two stocks to buy, one with 10 million
shares outstanding and the other with 60 million, the smaller one will
usually be the rip-roaring performer if other factors are equal.

30
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
The total number of shares of common stock outstanding in a com-
pany's capital structure represents the potential amount of stock avail-
able for purchase.
The stock's "floating supply" is also frequently considered by market
professionals. It measures the number of common shares left for possi-
ble purchase after subtracting the quantity of stock that is closely held
by company management. Stocks that have a large percentage of owner-
ship by top management are generally your best prospects.
There is another fundamental reason, besides supply and demand,
that companies with large capitalizations (number of shares outstand-
ing) as a rule produce dreadful price appreciation results in the stock
market. The companies themselves are simply too big and sluggish.
Pick Entrepreneurial
Managements Rather Than
Caretakers
Giant size may create seeming power and influence, but size in corpora-
tions can also produce lack of imagination from older, more conserva-
tive "caretaker managements" less willing to innovate, take risks, and
keep up with the times.
In most cases, top management of large companies does not own a
meaningful portion of the company's common stock. This is a serious
defect large companies should attempt to correct.
Also, too many layers of management separate the senior executive
from what's really going on out in the field at the customer level. And
in the real world, the ultimate boss in a company is the customer.
Times are changing at a quickening pace. A corporation with a fast-
selling, hot new product today will find sales slipping within three years
if it doesn't continue to have important new products coming to market.
Most of today's inventions and exciting new products and services are
created by hungry, innovative, small- and medium-sized young compa-
nies with entrepreneurial-type management. As a result, these organiza-
tions grow much faster and create most of the new jobs for all
Americans. This is where the great future growth of America lies. Many
of these companies will be in the services or technology industries.
If a mammoth-sized company occasionally creates an important new
product, it still may not materially help the company's stock because
the new product will probably only account for a small percentage of
the gigantic company's sales and earnings. The product is simply a little
drop in a bucket that's just too big.
S = Supply and Demand 
31
Institutional Investors Have a
Big Cap Handicap
Many large institutional investors create a serious disadvantage for
themselves because they incorrectly believe that due to their size they
can only buy large capitalization companies. This automatically elimi-
nates from consideration most of the true growth companies. It also
practically guarantees inadequate performance because these investors
may restrict their selections mainly to slowly decaying, inefficient, fully
matured companies. As an individual investor, you don't have this limi-
tation.
If I were a large institutional investor, I would rather own 200 of the
most outstanding, small- to medium-sized growth companies than 50 to
100 old, overgrown, large-capitalization stocks that appear on every-
one's "favorite fifty" list.
If you desire clear-cut factual evidence, the 40 year study of the great-
est stock market winners indicated more than 95% of the companies
had fewer than 25 million shares in their capitalization when they had
their greatest period of earnings improvement and stock market perfor-
mance. The average capitalization of top-performing listed stocks from
1970 through 1982 was 11.8 million shares. The median stock exhibited
4.6 million shares outstanding before advancing rapidly in price.
Foolish Stock Splits Can Hurt
Corporate management at times makes the mistake of excessively split-
ting its company's stock. This is sometimes done based upon question-
able advice from the company's Wall Street investment bankers.
In rny opinion, it is usually better for a company to split its shares 2-'
for-1 or 3-for-2, rather than 3-for-l or 5-for-l. (When a stock splits 2-for-
1, you get two shares for each one previously held, but the new shares
sell for half the price.)
Overabundant stock splits create a substantially larger supply and may
put a company in the more lethargic performance, or "big cap," status
sooner.
It is particularly foolish for a company whose stock has gone up in
price for a year or two to have an extravagant stock split near the end of
a bull market or in the early stage of a bear market. Yet this is exactly
what most corporations do.
They think the stock will attract more buyers if it sells for a cheaper
price per share. This may occur, but may have the opposite result the

32
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-l-M
company wants, particularly if it's the second split in the last couple of
years. Knowledgeable professionals and a few shrewd traders will proba-
bly use the oversized split as an opportunity to sell into the obvious
"good news" and excitement, and take their profits.
Many times a stock's price will top around the second or third time it
splits. However, in the year preceding great price advances of the lead-
ing stocks, in performance, only 18% had splits.
Large holders who are thinking of selling might feel it easier to sell
some of their 100,000 shares before the split takes effect than to have to
sell 300,000 shares after a 3-for-l split. And smart short sellers (a rather
infinitesimal group) pick on stocks that are beginning to falter after
enormous price runups—three-, five-, and ten-fold increases—and
which are heavily owned by funds. The funds could, after an unreason-
able stock split, find the number of their shares tripled, thereby dramat-
ically increasing the potential number of shares for sale.
Look for Companies Buying
Their Own Stock in the
Open Market
One fairly positive sign, particularly in small- to medium-sized compa-
nies, is for the concern to be acquiring its own stock in the open market-
place over a consistent period of time. This reduces the number of shares
of common stock in the capital structure and implies the corporation
expects improved sales and earnings in the future.
Total company earnings will, as a result, usually be divided among a
smaller number of shares, which will automatically increase the earn-
ings per share. And as we've discussed, the percentage increase in earn-
ings per share is one of the principal driving forces behind outstanding
stocks.
Tandy Corp., Teledyne, and Metromedia are three organizations that
successfully repurchased their own stock during the era from the mid-
1970s to the early 1980s. All three companies produced notable results
in their earnings-per-share growth and in the price advance of their
stock.
Tandy (split-adjusted) stock increased from $234 to $60 between 1973
and 1983. Teledyne stock zoomed from $8 to $190 in the thirteen years
prior to June 1984, and Metromedia's stock price soared to $560 from
$30 in the six years beginning in 1977. Teledyne shrunk its capitaliza-
tion from 88 million shares in 1971 to 15 million shares and increased
its earnings from $0.61 a share to nearly $20 per share with eight differ-
ent huvbacks.
S = Supply and Demand
33
Low Corporate Debt to Equity
Is Usually Better
Alter you have picked a stock with a small or reasonable number of
shares in its capitalization, it pays to check the percentage of the
firm's total capitalization represented by long-term debt or bonds.
Usually the lower the debt ratio, the safer and better the company.
Earnings per share of companies with high debt-to-equity ratios can
be clobbered in difficult periods of high interest rates. These highly
leveraged companies generally are deemed to be of poorer quality and
higher risk.
A corporation that has been reducing its debt as a percent of equity
over the last two or three years is well worth considering. If nothing
else, the company's interest expense will be materially reduced and
should result in increased earnings per share.
The presence of convertible bonds in a concern's capital structure
could dilute corporate earnings if and when the bonds are converted
into shares of common stock.
It should be understood that smaller capitalization stocks are less liq-
uid, are substantially more volatile, and will tend to go up and down
faster; therefore, they involve additional risk as well as greater opportu-
nity. There are, however, definite ways of minimizing your risks, which
will be discussed in Chapter 9.
Lower-priced stocks with thin (small) capitalization and no institu-
tional sponsorship or ownership should be avoided, since they have
poor liquidity and a lower-grade following.
A stock's daily trading volume is our best measure of its supply and
demand. Trading volume should dry up on corrections and increase
significantly on rallies. As a stock's price breaks out of a sound and
proper base structure, its volume should increase at least 50% above
normal. In many cases, it can increase 100% or more.
In summary, remember: stocks with a small or reasonable number of
shares outstanding will, other things being equal, usually outperform
older, large capitalization companies.

5
L = Leader or Laggard:
Which Is Your Stock?
Most of the time, people buy stocks they like, stocks they feel good
about, or stocks they feel comfortable with, like an old friend, old
shoes, or an old dog. These securities are frequently sentimental, drag-
gy slowpokes rather than leaping leaders in the overall exciting stock
market.
Let's suppose you want to buy a stock in the computer industry. If you
buy the leading security in the group and your timing is sound, you
have a crack at real price appreciation.
If, on the other hand, you buy equities that haven't yet moved or are
down the most in price, because you feel safer with them and think
you're getting a real bargain, you're probably buying the sleepy losers
of the group. Don't dabble in stocks. Dig in and do some detective
work.
Buy among the Best Two or
Three Stocks in a Group
The top two or three stocks actionwise in a strong industry group can
have unbelievable growth, while others in the pack may hardly stir a
point or two. Has this ever happened to you?
In 1979 and 1980, Wang Labs, Prime Computer, Datapoint, Rolm
Corp., Tandem Computer, and other small computer companies had
five-, six-, and seven-fold advances before topping and retreating, while
grand old IBM just sat there and giants Burroughs, NCR, and Sperry
Rand turned in lifeless price performances. In the next bull market
cycle, IBM finally sprang to life and produced excellent results. Home
L = Leader or Laggard
35
Depot advanced 10 times from 1988 to 1992, while Waban and
Hechinger, the laggards, clearly underperformed.
Avoid Sympathy Stock Moves
There is very little that's really new in the stock market. History just
keeps repeating itself. In the summer of 1963, I bought Syntex, which
afterwards advanced 400%. Yet most people would not buy it then
because it had just made a new high in price at $100 and its P/E ratio,
at 45, seemed too high.
Several investment firms recommended G. D. Searle, a sympathy play,
which at the same time looked much cheaper in price and had a similar
product to Syntex's. But Searle failed to produce stock market results.
Syntex was the leader, Searle the laggard.
Sympathy plays are stocks in the same group as a leading stock, but
ones showing a more mediocre record and weaker price performance.
They eventually attempt to move up and follow "in sympathy" the pow-
erful price movement of the real group leader.
In 1970, Levitz Furniture became an electrifying stock market winner.
Wickes Corp. copied Levitz and plunged into the warehouse furniture
business.
Many people bought Wickes instead of Levitz because it was cheaper
in price. Wickes never performed. It ultimately got into financial trou-
ble, whereas Levitz increased 900% before it finally topped. As Andrew
Carnegie, the steel industry pioneer, said in his autobiography, "The
first man gets the oyster; the second, the shell."
Is the Stock's Relative Price
Strength Below 70?
Here is a simple, easy-to-remember measure that will help tell you if a
security is a leader or a laggard. If the stock's relative price strength, on
a scale from 1 to 99, is below 70, it's lagging the better-performing
stocks in the overall market. That doesn't mean it can't go up in price,
it just means if it goes up, it will probably rise a more inconsequential
amount.
Relative price strength normally compares a stock's price perfor-
mance to the price action of a general market average like the Standard
& Poor's (S&P) Index, or in some cases, all other stocks. A relative
strength of 70, for example, means a stock outperformed 70% of the

36
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-l-M
stocks in the comparison group during a given period, say, the last six
or twelve months.
The 500 best-performing listed equities for each year from 1953
through 1993 averaged a relative price strength rating of 87 just before
their major increase in price actually began. So the determined winner's
rule is: Avoid laggard stocks and avoid sympathy movements. Look for
the genuine leaders!
Most of the better investment services show both a relative strength
line and a relative strength number and update these every week for a
list of thousands of stocks.
Relative strength numbers are shown each day for all stocks listed in
the Investor's Business Daily NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ price tables.
Updated relative strength numbers are also shown in Daily Graphs
charting service each week.
Pick 80s and 90s That Arc in
a Chart Base Pattern
If you want to upgrade your stock selection and concentrate on the best
leaders, you could consider restricting your buys to companies showing
a relative strength rank of 80 or higher. Establish some definite disci-
pline and rules for yourself.
If you do this, make sure the stock is in a sound base-building zone
(proper sideways price consolidation pattern) and that the stock is not
extended (up) more than 5% or 10% above this base pattern. This will
prevent you from chasing stocks that have raced up in price too rapidly
above their chart base patterns. For example, in the Reebok chart
shown at the end of Chapter 3, if the exact buy point was $29, the stock
should not be purchased more than 5% or 10% above $29.
If a relative price strength line has been sinking for seven months or
more, or if the line has an abnormally sharp decline for four months or
more, the stock's behavior is questionable.
Why buy an equity whose relative performance is inferior and strag-
gling drearily behind a laige number of other, better-acting securities
in the market? Yet most investors do, and many do it without ever look-
ing at a relative strength line or number.
Some large institutional portfolios are riddled with stocks showing
prolonged downtrends in relative strength. I do not like to buy stocks
with a relative strength rating below 80, or with a relative strength line
in an overall downtrend.
In fact, the really big money-making selections generally have a rela-
L = Leader or Laggard
37
live strength reading of 90 or higher just before breaking out of their
first or second base structure. A potential winning stock's relative
strength should be the same as a major league pitcher's fast ball. The
average big league fast ball is clocked about 86 miles per hour and the
outstanding pitchers throw "heat" in the 90s.
The complete lack of investor awareness, or at least unwillingness, in
establishing and following minimum realistic standards for good stock
selection reminds me that doctors many years ago were ignorant of the
need to sterilize their instruments before each operation. So they kept
killing off excessive numbers of their patients until surgeons finally and
begrudgingly accepted studies by a young French chemist named Louis
Pasteur on the need for sterilization.
It isn't very rewarding to make questionable decisions in any arena.
And in evaluating the American economy, investors should zero in on
sound new market leaders and avoid anemic-performance investments.
Always Sell Your Worst
Stock First
If you own a portfolio of equities, you must learn to sell your worst-per-
forming stocks first and keep your best-acting investments a little
longer. In other words, sell your cats and dogs, your losers and mistakes,
and try to turn your better selections into your big winners.
General market corrections, or price declines, can help you recognize
new leaders if you know what to look for. The more desirable growth
stocks normally correct l'/2 to 2/2 times the general market averages.
However as a rule, growth stocks declining the least (percentagewise) in
a bull market correction are your strongest and best investments, and
stocks that plummet the most are your weakest choices.
For example, if the overall market suffers a 10% intermediate term
falloff, three successful growth securities could drop 15%, 20%, and
30%. The ones down only 15% or 20% are likely to be your best invest-
ments after they recover. Of course, a stock sliding 35% to 40% in a
general market decline of 10% could be flashing you a warning signal,
and you should, in many cases, steer clear of such an uncertain actor.
Pros Make Mistakes Too
Many professional investment managers make the serious mistake of
buying stocks that have just suffered unusually large price drops. In

38
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
June 1972, a normally capable, leading institutional investor in
Maryland bought Levitz Furniture after its first abnormal price break in
one week from $60 to around $40. The stock rallied for a few weeks,
rolled over, and broke to $18.
Several institutional investors bought Memorex in October 1978,
when it had its first unusual price break. It later plunged.
Certain money managers in New York bought Dome Petroleum in
September 1981 after its sharp drop from $16 to $12, because it seemed
cheap arid there was a favorable story going around Wall Street on the
stock. Months later Dome sold for $1, and the street talk was that the
company might be in financial difficulties.
None of these professionals had recognized the difference between
the normal price declines and the highly abnormal corrections that
were a sign of potential disaster in this stock.
Of course, the real problem was that these expert investors all relied
solely on fundamental analysis (and stories) and their personal opinion
of value (lower P/E ratios), with a complete disregard for what market
action could have told them was really going on. Those who ignore what
the marketplace is saying usually suffer some heavy losses.
Once a general market decline is definitely over, the first stocks that
bounce back to new price highs are almost always your authentic leaders.
This process continues to occur week by week for about three months
or so, with many stocks recovering and making new highs. To be a truly
astute professional or individual investor you must learn to recognize
the difference between normal price action and abnormal activity.
When you understand how to do this well, people will say you have "a
good feel for the market."
Control Data—Abnormal
Strength in a Weak Market
During a trip to New York in April 1967, I remember walking through a
broker's office on one day when the Dow Jones Industrial Average was
down over twelve points. When I looked up at the electronic ticker tape
showing prices moving across the wall, Control Data was trading in
heavy volume at $62, up SV-j points for the day. I immediately bought
the stock at the market, because I knew Control Data well, and this was
abnormal strength in the face of a weak overall market. The stock sub-
sequently reached $150.
In April 1981, just as the 1981 bear market was commencing, MCI
Communications, a Washington, D.C.-based telecommunications stock
L = Leader or Laggard
39
trading in the over-the-counter market, broke out of a price base at $15.
It advanced to the equivalent of $90 in the following 21 months.
MCI tripled in a declining market. This was a great example of abnor-
mal strength during a weak market. Lorillard did the same thing in the
1957 bear market. Software Toolworks soared in January 1990.
So don't forget: It seldom pays to invest in laggard performing stocks
even if they look tantalizingly cheap. Look for the market leader.

6
I = Institutional Sponsorship:
A Little Goes A Long Way
It takes big demand to move supply up, and the largest source of
demand for stocks is by far the institutional buyer. A stock certainly
does not need a large number of institutional owners, but it should have
at least a few such sponsors. Three to ten might be a minimum or rea-
sonable number of mutual fund sponsors, although some stocks might
have a good deal more.
The would-be winning investor should learn to sort through and rec-
ognize that certain institutional sponsors are more savvy, have a
stronger performance record, and are better at choosing stocks than
others are. I call it analyzing the quality of sponsorship.
What Is Institutional
Sponsorship?
Sponsorship may take the form of mutual funds; corporate pension
funds; insurance companies; large investment counselors; hedge funds;
bank trust departments; or state, charitable, and educational institutions.
For measurement purposes, I do not consider brokerage firm
research department reports as institutional sponsorship, although a
few exert influence on certain securities. Investment advisory services
and market letter writers are also not considered to be institutional or
professional sponsorship in this definition.
Financial services such as Vickers and Arthur Weisenberger & Co. pub-
lish fund holdings and investment performance records of various insti-
tutions. In the past, mutual funds have tended to be slightly more
aggressive in the market, but banks have managed larger amounts of
I = Institutional Sponsorship
41
money. More recently, numerous new "entrepreneurial type" investment
counseling firms have been organized to manage institutional monies.
Performance figures for the latest 12 months plus the last three- to
five-year period are usually the most relevant. However, results may
change significantly as key portfolio managers leave one money man-
agement organization and go to another. The institutional leaders con-
tinually rotate and change.
For example, Security Pacific Bank (now merged into Bank America)
had somewhat modest performance in its trust investment division up
to 1981. But with the addition of new management and more realistic
concepts in the investment area, it polished up its act to the point that
it ranked at the very top in performance in 1982. In 1984, the top man-
ager of Security Pacific left and formed his own company, Nicolas
Applegate of San Diego.
If a stock has no professional sponsorship, chances are that its perfor-
mance will be more run-of-the-mill. The odds are that at least several of
the more than 1000 institutional investors have looked at the stock and
passed it over. Even if they are wrong, it still takes large buying to stimu-
late an important price increase in a security.
Also, sponsorship provides buying support when you want to get out of
your investment. If there is no sponsorship and you try to sell your stock
in a poor market, you may have problems finding someone to buy it.
Daily marketability is one of the great advantages of owning stock.
(Real estate is far less liquid and commissions and fees are much high-
er.) Institutional sponsorship helps provide continuous marketability
and liquidity.
Is It "Overowncd" by
Institutions?
A stock can also have too much sponsorship and become "overowned."
Overowned is a term we coined and began using in 1969 to describe a
stock whose institutional ownership had become excessive. In any case,
excessive sponsorship can be adverse since it merely represents large
potential selling if anything goes wrong in the company or the general
market. On the other hand, Snapple, in April 1993, was underowned.
The "favorite 50" and other lists of the most widely owned institu-
tional stocks can be rather poor, and potentially risky, prospect lists. By
the time performance is so obvious that almost all institutions own a
stock, it is probably too late. The heart is already out of the watermelon.

42
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-l-M
An Unassailable Institutional
Growth Stock Tops
In June 1974, we put Xerox on our institutional sell list at $115. We
received unbelievable flack because Xerox was then one of the most
widely held institutional stocks and had been amazingly successful up to
that point. However, our research indicated it had topped and was
headed down in price.
Institutions made Xerox their most widely purchased stock for that
year. Of course that didn't stop it from tumbling in price. What it did
prove was how sick the stock really was at that time, since it declined
steadily in spite of such buying. The episode did bring us our first large
insurance company account in New York City in 1974.
They had been buying Xerox on the way down in the $80s until we
persuaded them they should be selling instead of buying.
Famous Last Words—"We'll
Never Sell Avon Products"
We tried that same year to get another well-known eastern insurance
company to sell Avon Products at $105, and I recall the head of their
investment organization pounding the table and saying, "We'll never
sell Avon Products; it's such an outstanding company." I wonder if they
still have it?
Professionals, like the public, love to buy on declines. They also make
mistakes and incur losses. In many ways, some institutions are like the
public. Money management organizations have their experienced and
realistic decision makers, as well as their less seasoned or unrealistic
portfolio managers and analysts.
It is, therefore, not always as crucial to know how many institutions
own a stock as it is to know which of the better ones own or have pur-
chased a particular stock in the last quarter. The only important thing
about the number of institutional owners is to note the recent quarterly
trend. Is the number of sponsors increasing or decreasing?
Note New Stock Positions
Bought in the Last Quarter
New institutional positions acquired in the last quarter are more rele-
'•'--- l—M rnr vnme- time. Many investors feel
A,
I = Institutional Sponsorship
43
disclosures of a fund's new commitments are published after the fact,
too late to be of any real value. This is riot true.
These reports are available publicly about six weeks after the end of a
fund's quarter. The records are very helpful to those who can single out
the wiser selections and understand correct timing and the proper use
of charts.
Additionally, half of all institutional buying that shows up on the New
York Stock Exchange ticker tape may be in humdrum stocks and much
of the buying may be wrong. However, out of the other half you may
have some truly phenomenal selections.
Your task, then, is to weed through and separate the intelligent, high-
ly informed institutional buying from the poor, faulty buying. Though
difficult, this will become easier as you learn to apply and follow the
rules, guidelines, and principles presented in this book.
Institutional trades usually show up oil the stock exchange ticker tape
in most brokers' offices in transactions of 1000 shares up to 100,000
shares or more. Institutional buying and selling accounts for more than
70% of the activity in most leading companies. I estimate that close to
80% or 90% of the important price movements of stocks on the New
York Stock Exchange are caused by institutional orders.
As background information, it may be valuable to find out the invest-
ment philosophy and techniques used by certain funds. For example,
Pioneer Fund in Boston has always emphasized buying supposedly
undervalued stocks selling at low P/E ratios, and its portfolio contains a
larger number of OTC stocks. A chartist probably would not buy many
of Pioneer's stocks. On the other hand, Keystone S-4 usually remains
fully invested in the most aggressive growth stocks it can find. Evergreen
Fund, run by Steve Lieber, does a fine job of uncovering fundamentally
sound, small companies.
Jim Stower's Twentieth Century Ultra and his Growth Investors funds
use computer screening to buy volatile, aggressive stocks that show the
greatest percentage increase in recent sales and earnings.
Magellan and Contra Fund in Boston scours the country to get in
early on every new concept or story in a stock. Some other manage-
ments worth tracking might be AIM Management, Nicolas Applegate,
Thomson, Brandywine, Berger, and CGM. Some funds buy on new
highs, others try to buy around lows and may sell on new highs.
In a capsule, buy stocks that have at least a few institutional sponsors
with better-than-average recent performance records.

M = Market Direction
45
7
M = Market Direction:
How to Determine It
You can be right on every one of the factors in the first six chapters;
however, if you are wrong about the direction of the broad general mar-
ket, three out of four of your stocks will slump with the market averages
and you will lose money. Therefore, you need in your analytical tool kit
a simple reliable method to determine if you're in a bull (up) market or
a bear (down) market.
If you're in a bull market, are you in the early stage or in the latter
stage? Most importantly, what is the general market doing right now? Is
it weak and acting badly or is it merely going through a normal decline?
Is the market doing just what it should be, based on current conditions
in the country, or is it doing something abnormally strong or weak?
If you want to analyze the overall market correctly, you must start at
the most logical point. The best way to determine the direction of the
market is to follow and understand every day what the general market
averages are doing.
The Vital Importance of Daily
General Market Averages
The daily Dow Jones Industrial Average is a simple convenient stock
market average to study. The S&P 500 can also be used; however, it is
no more reliable for determining trend or direction, even though it is a
broader, more modern and representative average consisting of 500
companies. The most comprehensive average is the Investor's Business
Daily 6000 market value-weighted index, which covers all New York
Stock Exchange, American Stock Exchange, and NASDAQ common
o.^,-v<: ovpr fiOOO eouities in the overall market.
A Harvard professor once asked his students to do a special report on
fish. His scholars went to the library, read books about fish, and then wrote
their expositions. The students were shocked when, after turning in their
papers, the professor tore them up and threw them in the waste basket.
When they asked what was wrong with the reports, the professor said,
"If you want to learn anything about fish, sit in front of a fish bowl and
look at fish." He then made his students sit and look at fish for hours.
The classmates rewrote their assignment solely from observing and
studying the object itself.
The daily Dow Jones Industrial Average represents an average of thir-
ty large, basic industry stocks in America. It is one of the objects you
want to observe arid study carefully.
The difficult-to-recognize but meaningful changes in the behavior of
the market averages at important turning points are the best indicators
of the condition of the whole market.
Study the General Market
Chart Every Day
The general market should be studied closely every day, since reverses
in trends can begin on any one day. I emphasize this practical method
rather than that of interpreting other subsidiary indicators that are sup-
posed to tell you exactly what the market should be doing or listening
to the many stock market letter writers or technical analysts that pore
over twenty indicators and tell you what they think the market should
be doing. Market letters sometimes may create doubt, uncertainty, and
confusion in an investor's mind. Markets tend to go up when people
are skeptical and disbelieving.
Learn to interpret a daily price and volume chart of the general market
averages. If you do, you can't get too far off the track. You really won't
need much else unless you want to argue with the trend of the market.
Experience teaches you that continually arguing with the market can
be very expensive. That's how people go broke!
How You Can Identify Stock
Market Tops
When market indexes peak and begin major reversals, individual
investors should take action immediately and raise 25% or more cash by
selling stocks at the market prices (use of price limits on orders is not
generally recommended). Lightning action is even more critical if your

46
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
M = Market Direction
47
stock account is on margin. If your portfolio is 50% margined with half
of the money in your stocks borrowed from your broker, a 20% decline
in the price of your stocks will cause you to lose 40% of your money.
Don't wait around after the first few definite indications of a general
market top. Sell quickly before real weakness develops.
Napoleon once wrote that he never hesitated in the battlefield and
thereby gained an advantage over opponents. For many years he was
undefeated in battle. Similarly, in the market battlefield there are the
quick and there are the dead!
General market top reversals are usually late signals—the last straw
before a cave-in. In most cases, distribution or selling in individual mar-
ket leaders has, for days or even weeks, preceded the approaching mar-
ket break. Use of individual stock selling rules, which we will discuss in
the next two chapters, should lead you to sell one or two of your stocks
on the way up just prior to the general market peak.
After the top, poor market rallies and rally failures in the averages
will occur. Further selling is advisable when these weak rallies or rally
failures are recognized.
If you miss the S&P or Dow Jones topping signals, which is exceeding-
ly easy to do since they occur on only one or two days, you will be wrong
on the direction of the market and wrong on almost everything you do.
Recognizing when the market has hit a top or bottomed out is 50% of
the whole complicated ball game. It is also the key investing skill that
all-too-many professional and amateur investors seem to lack.
You can also try to plan ahead and write down on charts, based on the
market's historical precedent, where you expect the Dow to go and when
the rally or decline might end. But it is best to watch the market, as it will
eventually tell you when the correction or uptrend is finally completed.
To help anticipate possible market peaks, you should also determine
when long-term capital gains selling will begin by those who bought
stock in increased volume at original break-out buy points on individual
stock graphs. Every four or five years, like in 1986, Congress makes
purely political decisions to sometimes raise or do away with capital
gains rates, so this factor can become unimportant.
Congress Lacks Real
Economic Knowledge
It is unfortunate that many in Congress have a deficient understanding
of how the American economy actually works. A lower capital gains rate
is a powerful incentive for Americans to decide to start innovative new
businesses. And of course, new businesses create millions of new jobs
and new taxpayers to keep our economy growing. These basic facts most
in Congress have not yet been able to figure out. They incorrectly view
the capital gains tax solely as a plum to the rich. Some day, proven com-
petence and professional understanding may become an important pre-
requisite for obtaining high political office. Both Presidents John F.
Kennedy arid Ronald Reagan believed in lowering everyone's tax rates.
However most administrations and particularly Democratic Congresses
usually try to raise your tax rates so they can have more money to spend
for their inefficient programs.
Historical Tops for Further
Study
Historically, intermediate term distribution tops and reversals in the
general market averages occurred on the first week of August 1954,
where there was increased New York Stock Exchange volume without
further upward price progress on the Dow Jones Industrials, followed
the next day by heavy volume without further price progress up and a
wide price spread from high to low on the Dow; they also occurred in
the first week of July 1955, which was characterized by a price climax
with a wide price spread from the day's low to its high, followed the
next day by increased volume, with the Dow Jones average closing down
in price, and three days later, increased New York Stock Exchange vol-
ume again with the Dow Jones closing down.
(Other market tops to study occurred in the second week of
September 1955, third week of November f 955, second week of April
1956, second week of August 1956, first week of January 1957, third
week of July 1957, third week of November 1958, third week of January
1959, first week of May 1959, first week of June 1959, second week of
July 1959, first week of January 1960, second week of June 1960, first
week of April 1961, fourth week of May 1961, first week of September
1961, November and December 1961, fourth week of March 1962, first
week of June 1963, last week of October 1963, second week of May
1965, second week of February 1966, last week of April 1966, fourth
week of June 1966, second week of May 1967, last week of September
1967, December 1967, and the first week of December 1968.)
Displayed on the next two pages are daily market average graphs of
several tops that happened between 1973 and 1994.

48
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
Market tops, whether intermediate (usually 8% to 12% declines) or
primary bull market peaks, occasionally occur six to seven months after
the last major buy point in leading stocks and in the averages.
Specific Top Signs to Look for
bpecmc iuij *-n&*~ — __
Most of the top reversals in the past occurred after the averages moved
into new high ground and during their third to ninth day of rally. The
new highs were off small chart bases. The conditions under which the
tops occurred all appeared similar.
DOW JONES 30 INDUSTRIALS 1987 MARKET TOP
Market tons

50
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
Watch for Heavy Volume
without Further Price
Progress Up
What signs should you look for to detect a market top? On one of the
days in the uptrend, the total volume for the market will increase over
the preceding day's high volume, but the Dow's closing average will
show stalling action, or substantially less upward movement, than on the
prior few days.
The spread from the daily high to the daily low of the market index
may be a little larger than on earlier days. The market average does not
have to close down for the day, although in some instances it will do so,
making it much easier to recognize the distribution as professional
investors sell or liquidate stock.
Normal liquidation near the market peak will only occur on one or
two days, which are part of the uptrend. The stock market comes under
distribution while it is advancing! This is one reason so few people know
how to recognize distribution (selling).
Immediately following the first selling near the top, a vacuum exists
where volume may subside and the market averages will sell off for per-
haps four days. The second and probably the last early chance to recog-
nize a top reversal is when the market attempts its first rally, which it
will always do after a number of days down from its highest point.
Three Ways the First Rally
Attempt Can Fail
If this first attempted bounce back follows through on the third, fourth,
or fifth rally day either on decreased volume from the day before, if it
shows poor net price progress as compared to the progress the day
before, or if the market average overall recovers less than half of the ini-
tial drop from its former absolute intraday peak to the low, the come-
back is feeble and sputtering when it should be getting strong.
Be Prepared for Abrupt Rally
Failures
Frequently, the first stock market rally during a beginning downtrend will
fail abruptly. After the first day's resurgence, the second day will open
M = Market Direction
51
strongly. But toward the end of the day, the market will suddenly close
down. The abrupt failure of the market to follow through on its first
recovery attempt should probably be met by further selling on your part.
The Initial Market Decline
Can Be on Lower Volume
Most stock market technicians are fooled by the initial market decline
off the top when they see volume contracting. They do not understand
this is a normal occurrence after heavy distribution has occurred on the
way up around the top.
Volume begins to pick up on the downside, days or weeks later, when
it becomes obvious to more investors. But as in anything else, if you wait
until it becomes obvious to most people, it is going to cost you more.
You will be selling late.
Similar top indications can be seen on the S&P 500, New York Stock
Exchange Composite, or even on occasion an index of the current
cycle's speculative growth stock leaders. These averages should be fol-
lowed together because sometimes one average may give a much clearer
and more definite sell signal than another.
The speculative, or swinger-type, stock index is occasionally significant
because market movements are almost always led by a few aggressive
stocks. The leaders of the original move up may at times turn on their
heels first. Therefore, a speculative index may highlight the one-day
price reversal or stalling action on increased volume. I term this "heavy
or increased volume without further price progress on the upside."
The Hourly Market Index and
Volume Changes Give Hints
Near Turning Points
At sensitive potential turning points, an active market operator can
watch hour-by-hour market index price changes and hourly NYSE vol-
ume as compared with volume the same hour the prior day.
A good time to watch hourly volume figures is during the first
attempted rally following the initial decline off the market peak. You
should be able to see if volume is dull and dries up on the rally. Plus
you can recognize the first hour that the rally starts to fade, with volume
picking up on the downside.

52
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
HOURLY
: NEW YORK TIME
: 9:30 TO 10:00
: 1 0 : 00 TO 1 1 : 00
: 1 1 : 00 TO 1 2 : 00
: 1 2 : 00 TO 1 : 00
1 1 :00 TO 2:00
i 2:00 TO 3:00
i 3:00 TO 4:00
TOTAL VOLUME
N.Y.S.E. VOLUME
TUE
27
38
28
25
20
24
37
200
. VOLUME
.490
.330
. 1 5 0
,040
.080
.060
.580
.730
000
000
000
000
000
000
000
000
MON
23
26
25
23
1 7
1 8
20
1 5 5
AND MARKET CHANGES
VOLUME
.140
.710
. 1 2 0
.020
.480
.690
,850
.010
000
000
000
000
000
000
000
000
NET
• 4
+ 11
* 3
* 2
+ 2
* 5
+ 16
+ 45
CHANGE 
S&P 
500
350
620
030
020
600
370
730
720
000
000
000
000
000
000
000
000
2.02
2.60
2 . 8 1
2.90
3.32
3.53
2.48
DJIA
+14.51
»21 .36
+24.39
+23.44
+26.78
+28.70
+20.25
Another valuable period to observe hourly volume data is when the
market averages reach an important prior low point and start breaking
that support area. What you want to determine is the degree of pickup
in selling that occurs as the market is collapsing into new low ground.
Does the hourly volume pick up dramatically or only a small amount?
After a few days of undercutting of previous lows on only mildly
increased volume, do you get one or two days of increased volume with-
out further downside price progress? If so, you may be in a shakeout
area ready for an upturn. This occurred on April 23 and 24, 1990.
Some institutional trading departments or technical chart rooms plot
the market averages and volume on an hourly basis every day.
Look for Divergence of Key
Averages at Major Turns
At possible market turning points, check several averages to see if there
are significant divergences. For example, if the Dow Jones was up 10
and the S&P was up only the equivalent of two on the Dow for the day,
the S&P, being a broader index, would indicate the rally was no't as
broad and strong as it would appear on the surface.
To easily compare the S&P change to the Dow, divide the S&P aver-
age into the Dow Jones Industrials'. This figure can then be multiplied
by the change in the S&P to convert it into numbers comparable to the
Dow Jones movement for the day.
As an illustration: if the Dow closed at 1000 and the S&P 500 finished
at 125, the 1000 Dow would be eight times the S&P index of 125.
Therefore, if the Dow, on a particular day, is up 10 points and the S&P
is up .60, you can multiply the .60 by 8 and find that the S&P was only
up the equivalent of 4.80 on the Dow Jones.
M = Market Direction
53
A 33% Drop Requires a 50%
Rise to Break Even
The critical importance of recognizing the direction of the general mar-
ket cannot be ignored, because a 33% loss in a portfolio of stocks
requires a 50% gain just to recover to your break-even point.
For example, if a $10,000 portfolio is allowed to decline to $6666 (a
33% decline), the portfolio has to rise $3333 (or 50%), just to get you
even. Therefore, it is essential to try to preserve as much of the profit
you have built up as possible rather than to ride most investments up
and down through difficult cycles like many people do.
I generally have not had much problem recognizing and acting upon
the early signs of bear markets, such as those in 1962, 1966, 1969, 1973,
1976, and 1981. However, between 1962 and 1981, I twice made the sad
mistake of buying back too early. When you make a mistake in the stock
market, the only sound thing to do is correct it. Pride doesn't pay.
Most typical bear markets (some aren't typical) tend to have three
separate phases, or legs, of decline interrupted by a couple of rallies
that last just long enough to convince investors to begin buying. In 1969
and 1974 these phony, drawn out rallies lasted 15 weeks.
Many institutional investors love to "bottom fish." They will start buy-
ing stocks off the bottom and help make the rally convincing enough to
draw you in. You will usually be better off staying on the sidelines in
cash and avoiding short-term counterfeit rallies during the first few legs
of a bear market.
FRB Discount Rate Changes
Are Influential
The Federal Reserve Board discount rate and stock margin level
changes by the Fed (as it is called) are valuable indicators to watch.
They are perhaps the most important fundamental general market mea-
surements, more so than the prime rate charged by leading banks.
Interest rates, as a rule, provide the best confirmation of changing
basic conditions. Changes in the Federal Reserve Board's discount rate
are by far the most reliable market measurement. The Alan Greenspan
Federal Reserve Board discount rate increase to 6% in September 1987
led to the severe stock market break of October 1987.
In the past, it frequently marked the beginning of bear markets and
impending recessions when the discount rate was increased three times

54
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
in succession, and it usually signaled the end of a bear market when the
discount rate was finally lowered.
The Fed Kills the 1981
Economy
The bear market and the costly and protracted recession that began in
1981, for example, was created solely because the Federal Reserve
Board increased the discount rate in rapid succession on September 26,
1980; November 17, 1980; and December 5, 1980.
Their fourth increase, on May 8, 1981, thrust the discount rate to an
all-time high of 14%, which finally killed the American economy, our
basic industries, and the stock market. This starkly documents and
demonstrates how much our federal government controls and deter-
mines our economy, not Wall Street or business, as many people believe.
Discount rate changes should not be your primary indicator, howev-
er, because the stock market itself provides that function. Our detailed
analysis of many market cycles shows there have been three separate
important market turns that the discount rate did not help predict, one
of the more noteworthy being in 1962.
Washington Causes the 1962
Stock Market Break
Nothing was wrong with the economy in the spring of 1962, but the
market got skittish after the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) announced it planned a major investigation of the stock market.
Then President Kennedy jumped on the steel companies. IBM dropped
50%. A new bull market sprang to life following the Cuban missile
showdown with the Russians in October. All this happened with no
change in the discount rate.
Also there are situations where the discount rate was lowered six
months after the market bottom was reached. In this case, you could be
late in the stock game if you waited to see the first drop in the discount
rate. The Federal Reserve discount rate is the interest rate the Fed, act-
ing as a wholesaler, charges member banks to borrow money from it.
M = Market Direction
55
Other Key Market Factors to
Recognize and Use
During a bear market, stocks frequently open strong early in the morning
and close weak by the end of the day. During bull markets, stocks tend to
open down and come back later in the day to close up strongly. (The
market opens at 9:30 a.m. and closes at 4:00 p.m. New York time, 6:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m. California time. But it is subject to periodic change.)
Catch a shift with this easy test: see if you show a profit on any of your
last four or five purchases. If you haven't made a dime on any of them,
you might be witnessing a negative shift in the overall market.
Additionally, if stop-loss orders are used and either placed on the
stock exchange specialist's book at specific prices or mentally recorded
and acted upon, the market that is starting to top out will mechanically
force you, robotlike, out of many of your stocks. A stop-loss order
instructs the specialist in the stock on the exchange floor that once the
stock drops to your specified price, it then becomes a market order and
will be sold out on the next transaction.
In general, I think it is usually better to not enter stop-loss orders.
Watch your stocks closely and know ahead of time the exact price at
which you will immediately sell to cut a loss.
If, on the other hand, you can't watch your stocks closely or you are
the vacillating-type investor who can't make decisions to sell and get out
when you are losing, stop-loss orders might help protect you against
your distance or indecisiveness.
If you use them, remember to cancel the stop-loss order if you change
your mind and sell a stock before the stop-loss order is executed; other-
wise, you could later accidentally sell a stock you no longer own. Such
errors can cost you money.
One of the biggest faults investors have is that it takes time to reverse
their positive views. If you sell and cut losses 7% or 8% below buying
points, you will automatically be forced into selling as a general market
correction starts to develop. This should make you begin to shift into a
questioning, defensive line of thinking sooner.
A sophisticated investor who uses charts and understands market
action will also find there are very few leading stocks that are correct to
buy at a market-topping juncture. There is also a great tendency for lag-
gard stocks to show strength at this stage. Seeing a number of sluggish
or low-priced, lower-quality stocks becoming strong is a loud signal to

M = Market Direction
57
the experienced market operator that the upward market move may be
near its end. Even turkeys can try to fly in a windstorm.
A peculiar tendency during a bear market is for certain leading stocks
to resist the decline and hold up in price, creating the impression of
true strength. This is almost always false and simply postpones the
inevitable collapse. When they raid the house, they usually get everyone.
How to Interpret the
Advance-Decline Line
Some technical analysts religiously follow advance-decline line data,
which are cumulative statistics on the total number of New York Stock
Exchange stocks advancing each day versus the number declining.
However, this measure is imprecise because the advance-decline line
sometimes may veer down substantially before the actual top in a bull
market. In other words, a market keeps advancing toward higher
ground but is being led by fewer stocks.
There is one way an advance-decline can be an effective aid. During a
bear market you will have several rallies. It is of value to know how the
advance-decline line rallies during these intermediate recovery move-
ments. In September 1987, the line lagged the Dow rally to 2662.
Frequently, the advance-decline line will lag the market averages and
fail to break through prior resistance areas on the upside. This, in
effect, gives you an internal indication that although the Dow may seem
to be rallying strongly, the broad cross section of the market remains
frail, suggesting the rally will fizzle. In other words, it takes more than
just a few leaders to make a new bull market.
Forecasting the Powerful
January 1985 Rally
On the positive side, the powerful resumption of the bull market in the
second week of January 1985 was clearly and easily forecast by the
advance-decline line three weeks earlier. The NYSE advance-decline
line broke above immediately prior peaks three times while the
Investor's Business Daily stock index moved sideways and the Dow Jones
Industrials actually took a nosedive.
Market tops usually occur with odd lot (less than 100-share transac-
tions), short-interest, relatively low (1% or less of total odd-lot selling
activity), and, at a peak, in short-term, overbought, oversold indexes

58
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
(a popular but overrated index) or, as is most often the case, on the way
down from a peak in the index reached four to eight weeks earlier. These
are only secondary indicators and should be used only as confirmation of
the market environment after daily Dow distribution is spotted.
Following the one or two top signal days arid the first decline off the
top, there will be either a poor rally in the market averages, rally failure,
or both. You should learn in detail exactly what signals you are looking
for, and you should remain unbiased with no opinion about the market.
Let the daily Dow tell you what the market has been doing and is doing.
You do not need to know what the market is going to do! All you need
to know is what the market has actually done! This is the key! Think
about it for a minute. There is a fortune in this paragraph.
Follow the Leaders for Market
Clues
After the daily general market averages, I would say the second most
important indicator of primary changes in stock market direction is sim-
ply the way leading stocks act.
After an advance in stocks for a couple of years or more, if the majori-
ty of the original price leaders top, you can be fairly sure the overall
market is going to get into trouble. Of course, if you don't know how to
recognize when the more aggressive market leaders are making tops
and behaving in an abnormal fashion, this method of market analysis
won't help you very much.
There are numerous indications of tops in individual stock leaders.
Many of these securities will break out of their third or fourth price
base formation on the way up. Most of these base structures will appear
wider and looser in their price fluctuations and volatility and have defi-
nite faulty characteristics in their price patterns. A faulty base can best
be recognized and analyzed by studying charts of a stock's daily or week-
ly price and volume history.
Some stocks will have climax tops with rapid price runups for two or
three consecutive weeks. A few will have their first abnormal price break
off the top and display an inability to rally more than a trivial amount
from the lows of their correction. Still others will show a serious loss of
upward momentum in their most recent quarterly earnings reports.
The subject of when to sell individual stocks will be presented in great
detail in the next two chapters.
M = Market Direction
59
How You Can Spot Stock
Market Bottoms
Once you've recognized a bear market and scaled back your stock hold-
ings, the big question is how long you should remain on the sidelines. If
you plunge back in the market too soon, the apparent rally may fade
and you'll lose money. But if you hesitate at the brink of a roaring
recovery, opportunities will pass you by.
Again, the daily general market averages provide the best clues. Watch
for the first time an attempted short-term rally follows through on any-
where from its third to tenth day of recovery. The first and second days of
an attempted improvement can't tell you if die market has really turned, so
I ignore them and concentrate on die follow-through days of the rally. The
type of action to be looked for after the first few days of revival is an
increase hi total market volume from die day before, with substantial net
price progress for die day up 1% or more on the Dow Jones or S&P Index.
There will be some scarce cases where whipsaws may occur; however,
in almost every situation where the rally has a valid follow-through and
then abruptly fails, the market will very quickly come crashing down on
furious volume, normally the next day.
Just because the market corrects the day after a follow-through, how-
ever, does not mean the upward follow-through was false. When the
general market bottoms, it frequently backs and fills (testing) near the
lows made during the previous few weeks. It is usually more constructive
if these pullbacks or tests hold up at least a little above the absolute
intraday lows made recently in the market averages.
Wait for a Second
Confirmation at Market
Bottoms
At stock market lows, the individual investor is safer to wait for a sec-
ond confirmation of the turn before buying heavily. The bottom day in
the Dow Jones or the first strong day up after a major decline is usually
the first indication of a possible bottom. A good follow-through, with
the Dow Jones up 18 or 20 points or more (if the Dow is in the 1800
area) and accompanied by an increase in daily volume from the day
before, will usually be on the fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh day of the
attempted rally. This is your second confirmation and main buy signal.
Follow-throughs after the tenth day indicate weakness.

60
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
Occasionally, you may have a follow-through as early as the third day
if the first, second, and third day are all very powerful, for example,
each day being up 15 or 20 points on the Dow with large increased vol-
ume. A follow-through day should give the feeling of an explosive rally
that is strong, decisive, and conclusive, not begrudging and on the
fence, up only a marginal eight or nine points. Following are examples
of several important bottoms in the stock market between 1974 to 1990.
Is the Dow Theory Useful?
The Dow Theory is another method used by some to predict the begin-
ning of a new bull market. I do not recommend its use because it is just
DOW JONES 30 INDUSTRIALS 1974 MARKET BOTTOM
Market bottoms
M = Market Direction
61
DOW JONES 30 INDUSTRIALS 1982 MARKET BOTTOM
POW JONES 30 INDUSTRIALS 1 MO MARKET BOTTOM
Market Bottoms
too late and obsolete to be of practical use in today's modern market.
The Dow Theory, it must be remembered, was created around the turn
of the century when the railroad industry was a booming growth sector
of the American economy.
The theory simply states that you must always analyze the industrial
and railroad averages together. If, after a prolonged bear market, the
industrial average breaks out into new territory, you must wait for the
rails to also blast out and confirm the movement of the industrials
before you can safely turn bullish and begin buying.

62
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
The rail average was changed several years ago to include airlines and
is now called the transportation average. This also may dilute the theo-
ry's original concept, which was to confirm the rise of the basic (heavy)
industrial sector of the economy.
For investors interested in pursuing the matter in more detail,
William Peter Hamilton, in 1922, published the classical work entitled
The Stock Market Barometer. Robert Rhea, in 1932, wrote an updated
treatise on the subject, entitled The Dow Theory.
General Philosophy and
Observations
To many people, it seems prudent or fashionable to say or believe they
are long-term investors. Their policy is to stay fully invested through
thick and thin. Indeed, some institutions follow this philosophy. This
inflexible strategy can at times bring tragic results, particularly for indi-
vidual investors. Individuals and institutions alike may get away with this
nonmovement in several relatively mild bear markets that decline 20%
or less. However, many bear markets are not mild, and some are down-
right devastating.
The problem is always at the beginning when you first start to sense
an impending bear market. You cannot, in every case, project how bad
economic conditions might become or how long they could linger.
For example, Vietnam, inflation, and tight money helped turn the
1969—1970 correction into a two-year decline of 36.9%, whereas prior
bear markets typically averaged only nine months in duration with a
26% market downturn.
1973-1974: The Worst
Market Plunge Since 1929
Watergate hearings and the 1974 oil embargo by OPEC combined to
make 1973-1974 the worst stock market catastrophe since the 1929-1933
depression. While the 1973-1974 bear market saw the Dow correct 50%,
the average stock plummeted over 70%. This was a complete disaster for
stockholders and was almost as severe as the approximately 90% correc-
tion the average stock showed from 1929 to 1933. (However, in 1933,
industrial production was only 56% of the 1929 level and more than 13
million of that period's population were unemployed.)
M = Market Direction
63
The markets were so demoralized in 1973-1974 that most members
on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange were afraid the stock
exchange might not survive as a viable institution.
At that time, the head of a large brokerage firm lobbied two years in
Washington to get negotiated commission rates approved allowing bro-
kers to provide markets in NYSE stocks upstairs within their own organi-
zations and among their own customers.
This seemingly altruistic ploy might have limited the New York Stock
Exchange's ability to conduct an auction market and could have resulted
in the industry leaders' sharply cutting prices and driving many smaller
competitors out of business. Thereafter, the leader could theoretically
more easily dominate markets in stocks and set the price markups it might
desire. Of course, this is not what was told members of Congress.
Delegations of other New York Stock Exchange members went to
Washington to plead their case, which mainly fell on deaf ears because the
powers in Washington at the time didn't trust the self-serving nature of
the pleas. Fortunately, I had known Harold Williams, then chairman of the
SEC, when he was the dean of the University of California-Los Angeles
Business School. My firm had provided a few scholarships to students, so we
used to go to lunch on occasion, where we usually discussed the economy.
So I made a trip to Washington and discussed what I believed was go-
ing on. A few days later the SEC began a policy change away from
abruptly switching from fixed to negotiated rates and allowing big firms
to make upstairs markets with their listed stock customers. It slowed
down the breakneck pace it had been following toward possibly decapi-
tating the New York Stock Exchange market making function, putting
smaller organizations out of business and maybe opening the door to
more monopolistic control for the industry's largest firm.
So much for the effectiveness of self-serving industry groups, at least
in this one instance!
As an interesting postscript, the SEC was shortly after lambasted in
the press by a particular senator for dragging its feet on vitally needed
changes in the structure of the financial markets. The senator's name
was Harrison Williams, later convicted in the Abscam investigations.
Industry Action That Led
to the Creation of Discount
Firms
Some constructive changes were brought about several years later, after
a more thorough and proper period of analysis and testing. However, it

64
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
should be noted that when negotiated commissions were finally adopt-
ed to replace fixed rates, the end result was as follows: Many smaller
research firms were put out of business or forced into mergers with
industry giants, commissions to institutions were immediately cut in
half, and commission rates to individual investors were actually raised
several times, thereby laying the foundation for the successful develop-
ment of numerous discount brokerage firms.
Other Bear Market Warnings
Another sure sign of the beginning of a bear market, as mentioned ear-
lier, is when the original bull market leaders falter and a number of
lower-quality, low-priced speculative stocks begin to move up. When the
forgotten old dogs begin to bark and raise up out of the grave and
spearhead the market's advance, the stock market is on its last feeble
leg. Watch out.
Many times this will show up in the form of poor-quality stocks domi-
nating the most active stock list on "up" days in the market. It is simply
a matter of weak leadership trying to command the market. If the best
ones can't lead the market, the worst ones certainly aren't going to for
very long.
At other times, when the market begins an important top, it will recov-
er for a couple of months to a point near its high or actually go into new
high ground for a few days before it breaks down in earnest. This charac-
teristic occurred in December 1976 and January 1981 and again in
January 1984. This happens for a very important psychological reason.
The majority of people in the market can never be exactly right at exact-
ly the right time. In 1994 the NASDAQ topped weeks after the Dow.
In the stock market, the majority will be fooled first. This goes for
professionals as well as amateurs. If you were smart enough to sell or
sell short in January 1981, the powerful rebound in February and March
probably forced you to cover your short sales at a loss or buy some
stocks back during the strong rally. This is an example of how tricky and
difficult the stock market really is.
The new high by the Dow in January 1984 was accompanied by a diver-
gence in the broader-based and more significant S&P 500. It did not hit a
new high. This is the reason most professionals plot the indexes togeth-
er—to facilitate spotting the nonconfirmations at key turning points.
Bull markets do not end easily; neither do bear markets. You general-
ly get at least two or three pullbacks to fake out or shake out the few
remaining tenacious, but emotional, speculators. After everyone that
can be run in or run out throws in the towel and acts, there isn't anyone
M = Market Direction
65
left to take action in the same direction, so the market will finally turn
and begin a whole new trend.
Experts, Education, and Egos
On Wall Street, wise men, as well as fools, can be easily drawn into booby
traps. In fact, in my experience a person's years and quality of education
have very little to do with making big money investing in the market.
The more intelligent people are, the more they tend to think they
know what they are doing—and the more they will have to learri the
hard way how little they really know about outsmarting the stock mar-
ket. The few people I have known over the years who have been unques-
tionably successful making money in stocks were decisive, decision-mak-
ing individuals without huge egos.
The market has a simple way of whittling all excessive pride and
overblown egos down to size. After all, the whole idea is to be complete-
ly objective and recognize what the marketplace is telling you, rather
than try to prove that the thing you said or did yesterday or six weeks
ago was right. The fastest way to take a bath in the stock market or go
broke is to try to prove that you are right and the market is wrong.
In the final analysis, there is only one thing you can really do when a
new bear market begins. That is to have the sense to sell and get out or
go short. When you get out, you should stay out until the bear market is
over. This usually means nine months, and in the prolonged, problem-
ridden 1969-1970 and 1973-1974 periods, it meant two years.
Selling short can be profitable, but it is a difficult, highly specialized
subject and short selling should only be attempted during bear markets.
Chapter 11 discusses short selling in more detail.
Psychological Market
Indicators Can Help
There are several other indicators which may provide further data
about the trend of the general market. The percentage of investment
advisors that are bearish is an interesting measure of investment psy-
chology. Near bear market bottoms, the great majority of advisory let-
ters will be bearish, and near market tops, the majority will be bullish.
In other words, the majority is almost always wrong when it is most
important to be right.
The issue here is a question of degree. You cannot blindly assume
that because the last time the general market hit bottom and 65% of

66
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
investment advisors were bearish that the next time the advisors' index
reaches the same point, a major market decline will be over.
One of the great problems with indexes that move counter to the
trend is that you always have the question of how bad it can get before
everything finally turns. In this line, most amateurs in the market follow
and believe almost religiously in overbought/oversold indicators.
Overbought/Oversold: Two
Risky Words
The short-term overbought/oversold indicator, which is avidly followed
by some public investors, is a 10-day moving average of advances and
declines in the market. Caution: Sometimes in the beginning of a new
bull market the index will become substantially overbought because it has
just come out of a long decline. This should not be taken as a sign to sell
stocks. A similar occurrence can happen in the early stage or first leg of a
major bear market when the index becomes unusually oversold. This
event is really telling you that an eminent bear market may be beginning.
I once hired a well-respected professional who relied on such techni-
cal indicators. During the 1969 market break, at the very point when
everything told me the market was beginning to get into serious trouble
and I was aggressively trying to get several portfolio managers to liqui-
date stocks and raise large amounts of cash, he was telling them that it
was too late to sell because his overbought/oversold indicator said the
market was already very oversold.
You guessed it, the market split wide open after the index was over-
sold and really started to decline.
Needless to say, I rarely pay attention to overbought/oversold indicators.
What you learn from years of trying experience is generally more impor-
tant than the opinions and theories of experts using their favorite indica-
tor. Sometimes, the more widely quoted and accepted the market or eco-
nomic expert, the more trouble you might, on occasion, get yourself into.
Who can forget the expert who in the spring and summer of 1982
insisted that government borrowing was going to crowd out the private
sector and interest rates and inflation would soar back to new highs?
The exact opposite happened; inflation broke and interest rates came
crashing down. Conventional wisdom is rarely right in the market.
M = Market Direction
67
Stages of a Stock Market
Cycle
The winning investor should understand how a normal business cycle
unfolds and the duration of these periods, paying particular attention to
recent cycles. There is no foolproof guarantee that stock market cycles will
last diree or four years because it happened that way in the past.
Dedicated market students who desire to learn more about cycles and
the longer-term history of U.S. economic growth may want to write to
Securities Research Company, 101 Prescott Street, Wellesley Hills, MA
02181 and purchase one of their excellent long-term wall charts.
The stock market ordinarily bottoms out while business is still on a
downtrend, anticipating economic events months in advance. Analysts
refer to this phenomenon as "discounting of the future." In like man-
ner, bull markets frequently top out and turn down before economic
recession begins.
Therefore, using economic indicators to tell you when to buy or sell
the stock market is generally an exceedingly poor procedure. Yet some
firms have people trying to do this very thing.
It's a somewhat ridiculous approach, but it does seem to make those
who don't understand the stock market very well feel better.
Ironically, economists also have a rather faulty record of predicting
the economy. A few of our U.S. presidents, themselves lacking sufficient
understanding of the American economy, have had to learn this lesson
the slow, hard way. Around the beginning of 1983, just as the economy
was in its first few months of recovery, the head of President Reagan's
Council of Economic Advisors was a little concerned because the capital
goods sector was not very strong. This was the first possible hint that
this particular advisor might not be as thoroughly sound as he should
be, because capital goods demand is never good at the early stage of
economic recovery, and particularly so in the first quarter of 1983,
when American plants were operating at a low percentage of capacity.
You should check earlier cycles to learn the sequence of industry
group moves at various stages of the market. For example, railroad
equipment, machinery, and other capital goods industries are late
movers in a business or stock market cycle. This knowledge can help
you determine what stage of the current market period you are in.
When these groups start running up, you know you're near the tail end.

68 
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
The Big Money Is in the First
Two Years
Almost always, the really big money is made in the first one or two years
of a normal new bull market's upward movement. This, then, is the
point in time you must recognize as soon as possible and fully capitalize
upon while the golden opportunity is there.
The remainder of the up cycle usually consists of back and forth
movement in the market averages, followed by a bear market. The year
1965 was one of the few exceptions, but this strong market in the third
year of a new cycle was caused by the advent of the Vietnam war.
In the first or second year of a bull market, you should have a few
intermediate-term declines in the market averages, usually lasting a cou-
ple of months, with the market indexes dropping 8% to occasionally
15%. After several sharp downward adjustments of this nature, and
once two years of a bull market have passed, heavy volume without fur-
ther upside progress in the daily market averages could indicate the
beginning of the next bear market.
Since the market is made up of supply and demand, you can decipher
a chart of the general market averages almost the same as you read the
chart of an individual stock. The better publications display the Dow
Jones Industrial Average and S&P 500 in the front of their periodicals.
They should show the high and low and close of the market averages
day by day for the prior year, together with the daily New York Stock
Exchange volume in millions of shares traded.
Bear markets normally show three legs of price movement down;
however, there is no rule that says you cannot have two or even five
"down" phases or more. You have to objectively evaluate overall condi-
tions and events in the country and let the general market tell its own
story. And you should learn to recognize the story the market is
attempting to tell you.
The Effect of News Events on
the Market
Some charts of market averages list major news events that occurred at
specific times during the last 12 months. This information can be
extremely valuable, particularly if you retain and review old back copies.
You then have a history over many years of the market averages, togeth-
er with important news events that may have influenced the market's
direction in the past.
M = Market Direction
69
History can repeat itself. If you have solid information about how
markets behaved during certain past incidents, then you can develop
better judgment for the future.
It is valuable to know, for example, how the market reacted in the
past to a change of administration in Washington, rumors of war, wage
and price controls, discount rate changes by the Federal Reserve Board,
or "panic" news circumstances.
The chart on the next page of the general market averages shows sev-
eral past cycles.
Other General Market
Indicators
The upside/downside volume is a short-term index plotted on a 10-day
moving average which relates trading volume in stocks that close up in
price for the day to volume in stocks that close down. This index may
show divergence at some intermediate turning points in the market.
For example, following a 10% to 12% dip in the general market aver-
ages, the averages may continue to penetrate into new low ground for
one or two more weeks. Yet the upside/downside volume may suddenly
shift and show there is steadily increasing upside volume while the
downside volume may be subsiding.
This switch usually signals an impending intermediate-term upturn in
the market. Of course, if you follow carefully the daily Dow Jones price
changes, together with daily volume on the NYSE, you'll pick up these
same indications, so the upside/downside index is really not necessary.
The short-interest ratio is the total amount of short selling on the
New York Stock Exchange, expressed as a percentage of total NYSE
trading volume. It can reflect the degree of bearishness shown by specu-
lators in the market. The May-June 1994 rally was a short squeeze rally.

M = Market Direction
71
Historically, you will see two or three major peaks (measuring greatly
increased short selling) in this index along bear market bottoms. There
is no positive rule governing how high the index should go, but you can
study past general market bottoms to review what has happened to the
short-interest ratio in former periods.
The odd-lot-balance index is a ratio between the total buying and sell-
ing of odd loiters. Odd loiters are individual investors that buy or sell in
less than round lots (100 shares). The theory behind this index is lhal
ihe less-inforrned crowd tends to be wrong at important turning points.
Odd-lol indexes have been of value in ihe past, yet often have been
misunderstood and misinterpreted. It is nol crilical that the index show
nel buying or nel selling. What is important is the trend of activity. If
odd loiters have been buying, on balance, and trend toward buying less,
it means they are becoming more cautious. Odd-lot theory suggesls
their caution could turn out to be wrong.
If odd loiters have been selling steadily, the poinl to watch for is
when a shift in this trend occurs, in other words, when they begin lo sell
less or transition toward buying. If they are beginning to sell less, the
suggestion is lhal ihey are less worried—and ihe market could be near a
significant top.
Caution: There is confusing dislorlion in ihe odd-lol figures in
December and January broughl aboul by changes in investors' porlfo-

72
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
lios for year-end tax benefits. Odd-lot figures also have seemed to be of
less importance in recent periods.
The odd-lot, short-sales index, which measures the percent of total
odd-lot sales that are short sales, is one constructive measurement of
crowd psychology and often has signaled the bottoms of bear markets.
When you reach a point where numerous small investors conclude the
only way to make money is to sell short, you are very late in the down
cycle. Caution: Do not jump to a conclusion the first time the odd-lot,
short-sales index increases. It can build up to a series of peaks over sev-
eral months.
Although not watched as frequently at tops, this index is usually
around its low point at major bull market tops. Researchers can note the
extreme low point reached at the peak at the end of December 1976.
Of all the many general market indicators, the odd-lot, short-sales
index historically has been one of the more reliable confirming index-
es. Odd-lot figures are shown in the financial section of most daily news-
papers. If you will compare the bottoms of all prior bear markets, you
will see that in almost every case there was a substantial increase in emo-
tional odd-lot short selling.
The odd-lot, short-sales index is valid because it tends to represent
crowd psychology. Garfield Drew's book, New Methods for Profits in the
Stock Market, written in 1948, provides statistics on odd-lot sales over
many earlier eras.
Some people feel odd-lot studies have no validity in today's world of
option buying and selling by small investors. However, it was valuable in
the past, and human nature and mass psychology haven't changed much.
Now that speculation in put and call options is the get-rich-quick
scheme for impatient new investors, you can also plot and analyze the
ratio of calls purchased to puts bought for another valuable view of
crowd temperament.
Another favorite indicator many investors watch is the specialist
short-selling index. Investors believe that when a stock exchange spe-
cialist is short, he is very bearish and is likely to be correct.
M = Market Direction
73
Professionals are generally more correct than are most investors; how-
ever, the specialists' heavy short selling can result from an overpowering
rally in the market that places huge demands upon their market-making
capacity and which they fulfill by supplying stock short. I think this
index is overused, overrated, not properly understood, and frequently
misinterpreted.
You cannot assume future market rounds will exactly mirror past
cycles and the relationship of the index to those tops and bottoms.
Market conditions change, and influences upon the market change as
well. Option trading, for example, has put a new twist into the action of
specialists as well as other speculators.
The specialist short-selling index may, on occasion, be valuable as
long as you survey it with common sense and don't try to build your
case for the market around its implications. You can have an illuminat-
ing perspective if you plot the specialist short-selling index, the member
firms short selling, and odd-lot or public short selling side by side for
comparison.
Mutual fund sales and redemptions (excluding money market funds)
are important indicators because mutual funds, although not as large as
banks, are active investors and impact the stock market. If mutual fund
redemptions have been steadily increasing, while fund cash positions
are at a historical low point, mutual funds cannot provide much buying
support for the market.
The cash and equivalent position of mutual funds (excluding money
market funds) and the cash position of pension funds is an important
indicator of future market trends.
Ironically, major bull markets begin when institutional cash positions
are higher than normal, and bull markets usually top out when cash
positions are lower than normal.
Mutual funds cash position
This occurred again at the bottom in August 1982 and was one of the
reasons for the unbelievable bull market stampede on the upside that
followed. A record number of mutual funds had 30% to 50% cash posi-
tions at the 1982 bottom, and they were dead wrong.

74
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
When you are wrong in the market, sooner or later you are forced
back into the market to correct your untenable position.
Some services measure the percentage of new money flowing into
corporate pension funds that is invested in common stocks and the
amount invested in cash equivalents or bonds. This, too, provides a
measure of institutional investor psychology.
For many years the composite strategy of institutional investors near
market tops and bottoms invariably has been wrong. As did the odd let-
ters of old, when the majority of institutions decide it is time to keep
more of their investments in cash or bonds, it is generally time for a
roaring advance in the prices of common stocks.
In the stock market, majority (crowdlike) thinking is rarely right even
if it is among institutions and supposed professionals. Wall Street every
year or two does seem to adopt a one-track mind, with everyone follow-
ing each other like a herd of cattle.
A decline in the average price of the most active stocks daily is an indi-
cator of downgrading in quality and an increase in speculative buying.
This, at times, occurs as a market is beginning to top out in its later phase.
Two indices frequently used to measure the degree of speculative
activity are OTC volume as a percent of NYSE volume, and AMEX vol-
ume compared to NYSE volume. Volume on the over-the-counter mar-
ket should be measured relative to activity on the Big Board (NYSE).
This measure provided a helpful tip-off of impending trouble during
the summer of 1983 when OTC volume reached the level of NYSE vol-
ume. When a trend persists, indicating wild, rampant speculation,
you're close to a general market correction.
AMERICA* STOCK EXCHANGE 
350.M 41.17
""" ~~
M = Market Direction
75
Some publications show a long-term, inflation-adjusted market index.
This is an academic economist's concoction and is of no real value to
decision makers or analysts in the market.
A defensive stock index is composed of defensive (more stable and
supposedly safer) stocks, such as utilities, tobaccos, foods, and soaps.
Increased strength in such stocks after a couple of years of bull market
conditions may indicate "smart money" slipping into defensive positions
and a weaker general market ahead.
Defensive stock index
The unweighted stock index shows the true picture of the average
stock. The unweighted index attempts to measure the market strength
as a whole by eliminating any possible bias due to weighting of individ-
ual companies. In some markets, the weighted averages such as the S&P
500 may overstate the actual strength of the market.
The glamour index is composed of speculative or aggressive-type
stocks. This index attempts to measure the demand for such stocks,
thereby indicating investor sentiment toward the market. A strong
upturn in this swinger-type index should indicate new or renewed spec-

76
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-l-M
Another possible indicator you should be aware of in evaluating the
stage of a market cycle is the percentage of stocks on the daily new-high
list that could be categorized as either defensive, low-priced, laggard, or
preferred stocks. In pre-1983 cycles, some technicians stated their lack
of concern with weakness in the market because of the number of new
highs being made. Yet, a detailed analysis of the stocks that make the
new-high list has shown that when a high number of preferred or defen-
sive stocks appear, it has frequently signaled a bear market environ-
ment. A little surface knowledge can hurt you in the stock market.
The Best Monetary (Money)
Indicators
Money market indicators mirror general economic activity. I follow
selected government and Federal Reserve Board measurements, includ-
ing 10 indicators of the supply and demand for money and indicators of
interest rate levels.
History proves that the direction of the general market, as well as of
several industry groups, is often affected by changes in interest rates.
Because the level of interest rates is usually tied to Federal Reserve tight-
or-easy monetary policy, you may want to be aware of measures such as
reserve requirements for member banks, the Ml and M2 money supply
percent rate of change, federal funds rate, consumer price index, mem-
ber bank reserves, ratio of government securities holdings to bank loans,
90-day Treasury Bill yields, and U.S. Treasury Bond prices.
These monetary indicators might help you anticipate future govern-
ment policy decisions and their effects on the stock market, individual
stocks, and the American economy.
Changes in 90-day Treasury Bill rates and the erratic and tricky Fed
Funds rate sometimes help predict impending discount rate changes.
The monetary base and the velocity of money are other important mea-
sures used by professionals. The Fed also watches economic data such
as unemployment figures and Gross National Product (GNP) changes.
Don't be discouraged if the subject of monetary indicators seems
complex; it is. Few economists, few presidents, virtually no one in
Congress, and even few people at the Federal Reserve, including some
heads of the Fed, understand it as well as they should.
This is just one of the many reasons why the Fed should probably
remain relatively independent and not subject to political control or
extreme pressure from the Congress. It might, however, be constructive
to let the term of office for the head of the Fed coincide with the presi-
M = Market Direction
77
For the investor, the simplest and most relevant monetary indicator to
follow and understand is the changes in the Federal Reserve Board dis-
count rate. With the advent of program trading and various hedging
devices, some funds use such techniques to hedge portions of their portfo-
lio in an attempt to provide some downside protection during risky mar-
kets. The degree to which these are successful again depends greatly on
skill and timing, but one possible effect for some managers may be to
lessen the pressure to have to dump portfolio securities on the market.
More and more funds operate under a plan of very wide diversifica-
tion and a fully or near fully invested policy at all times. This is because
most managers have difficulty in getting out and into cash at the right
time and, most importantly, then getting back in fast enough to partici-
pate in the initial powerful rebound off the ultimate bottom.
Is C-A-N S-L-I-M Momentum
Investing?
No, C-A-N S-L-I-M has absolutely nothing to do with momentum invest-
ing. In fact, I'm not even sure what momentum investing is. Some ana-
lysts and reporters, who have no idea at all how we invest, have referred
to what we're suggesting as momentum investing and have said that it's
buying the stocks that have gone up the most and that have the strongest
relative price strength. No one in their right mind invests that way.
That is not what we're doing. We're buying companies with strong
fundamentals, large sales and earnings increases resulting from unique
new products or services and trying to time the purchases at a correct
point as the company emerges from consolidation periods and before
the stock runs up dramatically in price.
To summarize this vitally important and rather complex subject, learn
to interpret the daily general market indexes and action of the individ-
ual market leaders. Once you know how to do this correctly, you can
stop listening to all the uninformed, costly, personal market opinions
from amateurs and professionals alike.
How to Remember and Use
What You've Read So Far
It isn't enough just to read; you need to remember by association and
apply a simple-two word phrase—C-A-N S-L-I-M.

78
A Winning System: C-A-N S-L-I-M
Most people seem to have as much trouble controlling weight as they
do selecting winning stocks. So each letter in the C-A-N S-L-I-M slogan
stands for one of the seven basic fundamentals of selecting outstanding
stocks. If most successful stocks exhibit these seven common characteris-
tics at early emerging growth stages, these basics are worth learning. Here
is the formula. Repeat it several times until you can recall and use it easily.
C 
= Current quarterly earnings per share. They must be up at least
20%.
A 
= Annual earnings per share. They should show meaningful growth for the
last five years.
N 
= New. Buy companies with new products, new management, or significant
new changes in their industry conditions. And most important, buy stocks
as they initially make new highs in price. (Forget cheap stocks; they are
usually cheap for a very good reason.)
S 
= Supply and Demand. There should be a small or reasonable number of
shares outstanding, not large capitalization, older companies. And look
for volume increases when a stock begins to move up.
L 
= Leaders. Buy market leaders, avoid laggards.
I 
= Institutional sponsorship. Buy stocks with at least a few institutional spon-
sors with better than average recent performance records.
M 
= The general market. It will determine whether you win or lose, so learn to
interpret the daily general market indexes (price and volume changes)
and action of the individual market leaders to determine the overall mar-
ket's current direction.
PART 2
Be Smart from
the Start

8
Finding a Broker,
Opening an Account,
and What It Costs
to Buy Stocks
Branch offices of most New York Stock Exchange firms have a broker
of the day. He or she will probably be called a registered representative
(RR), an account executive (AE), or an investment consultant (1C).
This is the person you will likely talk to if you visit a broker's office look-
ing for information or to open an account.
How do you find a competent stockbroker? I suggest you follow a
slightly different procedure.
Go to the office of the firm you choose and ask to see the office man-
ager or vice president in charge of the office. Introduce yourself to the
manager. Say you are considering opening a new account but would
like to deal with a broker that has definitely been successful at making
money in his or her own personal account and for most customers'
accounts.
This person should have already been a broker for two or three years
or more and possibly be 27 or older. But don't be too impressed with
age. The registered representative you're looking for could be young,
middle-aged, or older. Age or years of experience is certainly no sign
that a broker is a very successful student of the stock market.
Did you ever hear the story about the schoolteacher who had 25
years' experience but was turned down for a job by a new principal?
The principal felt the teacher didn't have 25 years' experience, but just
one year's experience 25 times over.
Finding a Broker, Opening an Account, and What It Costs to Buy Stocks 
81
Ask Questions....It's Your
Money
When you meet the broker recommended to you, ask how he or she
gets stock ideas and research information. Don't be afraid to ask a lot of
questions. It's your money.
You could ask about the broker's investment philosophies, beliefs,
and methods. What are two or three of the best stock market books he
or she has read? If the broker can't easily name a few, then maybe you
should be a little cautious.
If the broker relies solely on his or her own firm's research department
for ideas, information, and reports, you may be better off visiting with a
few other brokerage firms before you decide where to open your account.
The better brokers will show more initiative, perhaps by subscribing
to a chart service or Investor's Business Daily on their own, and will
probably have several other sources of information, ideas, and research.
Following brokerage firm research department reports is not neces-
sarily an outstanding way to find money-making investment ideas. When
I was a broker with a major New York Stock Exchange firm years ago, I
never followed any of the firm's research because it wasn't too astute.
Brokers that have attended Investor's Business Daily all-day workshops
certainly should be far more knowledgeable than those who haven't.
Should You Have Several
Brokerage Accounts?
Some customers have accounts with two or three different brokers. In
most cases such a practice is silly, since your account won't be as impor-
tant to any one broker. You may also receive conflicting advice, which
will be confusing and costly.
Money is made in the stock market by concentrating, not scattering.
The same should go for your brokerage account. Concentrate your
activity with the best stockbroker you can find. If this doesn't work well
after a year or two, change and find another broker.
If you are more accomplished and make your own buy-and-sell deci-
sions, you might want to consider a discount broker. You could save as
much as 50% on the cost of commissions. Discount brokerage firms
have grown and increased their share of the retail securities business
ever since the advent of negotiated commissions in May 1975.

82
Be Smart from the Start
If you don't know the name or location of a stock brokerage firm that is
a member of the New York Stock Exchange, look in the yellow pages of
your local telephone book. The reason I suggest a New York Stock
Exchange firm is that NYSE membership in the securities industry is a lit-
tle like the Good Housekeeping seal of approval. It certainly doesn't guar-
antee you will make money; however, you will be dealing with a more sub-
stantial organization. Members usually pay several hundred thousand
dollars or much more just to buy a seat on the New York Stock Exchange.
Stock exchange firms also have many rules and regulations to which
they must adhere. And they are subject to surprise audits and annual
examinations from the stock exchange.
Conversely, some firms that are only members of the NASD, the
National Association of Securities Dealers, and perhaps a local or region-
al exchange, may have too easily gained entrance into the securities busi-
ness. They may not be backed up with as substantial a capital base.
If you've never opened an account with a brokerage firm, don't be
timid or reluctant to visit one. It's simple and easy, just like opening an
account with your local bank or savings and loan. You will have to fill
out and sign new account papers before you will be able to buy or sell
any stock. You may open a single account or, if you're married, you may
want to open a joint account. The broker will also ask for credit refer-
ences, such as your bank. All brokerage firms have a regular commis-
sion schedule which they should be able to show you. The commission
generally averages from 1% to 2% to buy or sell a stock.
When you buy or sell stock, you will receive a confirmation in the
mail (a small slip of paper) which will show what stock you bought or
sold, the price paid or received, the commission paid, and the total dol-
lar amount you owe or will receive if you sold a stock. It will also show
the settlement date by which the transaction must be settled.
It's best to pay these bills immediately on receipt since they will be due
in a few days. Stock certificates must be delivered to your broker proper-
ly endorsed without delay when you wish to sell a stock, otherwise the
transaction can't be settled on time. Sometimes stock powers (legal
endorsements) can be signed and mailed separately to your broker.
It is usually more convenient for both you and the NYSE firm to hold
your stock certificates in street name (the brokerage company name),
where they are held in safekeeping for you by the brokerage firm. All
accounts are insured to $500,000 by the Securities Investor Protection
Corporation, and additional insurance is carried by most firms.
Certificates are kept in a vault, so they should be safer than if you try to
take care of them yourself.
The largest retail brokerage firms in the United States are: Merrill
• 
T,;—— !?„„„„,. K, Smith- Dean Witter Reynolds; Prudential
Finding a Broker, Opening an Account, and What It Costs to Buy Stocks
83
Securities; Paine Webber; A.G. Edwards & Sons; Kidder, Peabody & Co.;
Smith Barney Shearson, Inc.; Bear, Stearns & Co.; First Boston; Goldman,
Sachs & Co.; Morgan Stanley & Co.; and Salomon Brothers. Charles
Schwab, Fidelity Brokerage Services, and Quick & Reilly are a few of the
larger discount firms.
All of the above brokerage organizations are substantial and experi-
enced. Merrill Lynch has approximately 6 million customers, and
Prudential is a member of the giant Prudential Insurance Company fami-
ly. There are also many capable medium-sized, regional retail, or dis-
count retail brokerage firms that are New York Stock Exchange members.
An exceptionally able broker can be almost as important to you as a
good doctor, so choose wisely.
Why You Should Have an
Individual Retirement
Account (IRA)
Why are so many people investing in IRA accounts, as they are com-
monly known?
U.S. law allows working individuals to invest any amount up to $2000
every year in a tax-deferred IRA account if the company they work for
does not have a qualified retirement plan. This can be an enormous tax
advantage, and every American should consider taking advantage of it.
First, you may be able to deduct the $2000 investment from your tax-
able income and not have to pay income tax on that part of your earn-
ings. And you can do this every year that you invest in an IRA, until you
are 70 years old. If married and both of you are working, you can invest
any amount up to $4000 every year.
The second advantage of an IRA is that the profits, dividends, or
interest you earn from the investments you make in the IRA account are
tax-deferred. These earnings compound tax-free for the many years until
you retire and begin taking distributions.
Do you have any idea what $4000 invested tax-free every year, earning
and compounding at an average rate of 12% per year, would be worth
after 30 years? Your account would be worth $965,332!
IRA plans allow you to begin withdrawals (of course subject to regular
income tax rates at the time of withdrawal) at age 59/£, but you must
begin by age 70'/2. If you are disabled, you can withdraw early; otherwise
early withdrawal is subject to a 10% penalty plus the regular income tax.
You don't have to wait till age 59L/2 to benefit from the plan, however; if
you withdraw funds after five or six years and pay the penalty, you are still
better off than if you had been in similar investments with no IRA tax ben-

84
Be Smart from the Start
efit. You should, though, view your IRA as a long-term plan for deferring
taxes and saving for your retirement. Be determined and stick with it.
Withdrawal, after age 59^, can be in a lump sum or spread in install-
ments over a period of years. You will pay ordinary tax rates on your
withdrawals, which should be lower once you retire.
Most families in America should budget carefully their monthly and
annual expenses and make sure they save enough of their hard-earned
income to invest in their own Individual Retirement Account each year.
You can open an IRA account at any bank or stock brokerage firm. IRA
accounts cannot be margined.
The most favored vehicles for investment of your IRA money have
been interest-bearing money market funds, savings accounts, certificates
of deposits, mutual funds, or self-directed accounts in common stocks
through a NYSE stock brokerage firm. However, fixed-income savings
accounts and money market funds are not likely to provide the maxi-
mum hedge against inflation.
Keogh plans are similar to IRAs except they are only for self-employed
workers. Keoghs, however, allow a higher maximum contribution: a
defined contribution Keogh has a maximum contribution limit of up to
20% of a person's annual salary or up to $30,000. Another form of a
Keogh, known as a defined Benefit Keogh, may allow even greater annual
contributions.
Many companies offer 401 (k) salary-reduction plans which allow you
to invest, on a tax-deferred basis, larger amounts than are allowable in
IRAs, but under different rules and restrictions.
401 (k) plans have several other advantages and if your company has a
401 (k) plan you should definitely investigate participating.
In 1982, approximately 60 million American households were eligible
to open one or more IRA plans. In time, IRAs could become more
important than Social Security. This will mean a large increase in the
number of savers and investors in America in the future.
If you only have $500 or $1000 to invest each year, that's okay. You
don't have to invest the maximum allowed each year. There is no mini-
mum dollar amount required to begin an IRA.
If you opt for an IRA, then you had better start learning about invest-
ments in a serious and planned way. Keep this book and read it two or
three times until you understand everything in it. And then reread it
every few years to help you keep on target. Why? Because, if you invest
$2000 each year, in only four or five years you are going to have $10,000
or more—and that is an important sum for anyone. You owe it to your-
self and your future to learn how to manage your important invest-
ments properly.
9
When to Sell
if Your Selection or Timing
Might Be Wrong
Sometimes the best offense is a great defense. Now that you've
learned the basic rules of buying stocks, our emphasis will switch to
when to sell them. In sports, a team that is all offense and no defense
seldom wins the league. Since the days of Branch Rickey, the Los
Angeles Dodgers, and before that the Brooklyn Dodgers, have generally
had good pitching. The pitching staff and defense is probably 70% of
the game of baseball. It's just impossible to win without it.
In the stock market, you absolutely can't win either unless you have a
strong predetermined defense to protect yourself against large losses. This
may surprise you, but if you invest in stocks, you are going to make a never-
ending number of mistakes in your selection and timing of purchases.
These poor decisions will lead to losses, some of which can become
quite awful. No matter how smart you may think you are or how good you
believe your information or analysis is, you simply are not going to be
right all of the time. In fact, you will probably be right only half the time!
Bernard Baruch's Secret
Market Method
Bernard Baruch, a famous market operator on Wall Street and trusted
advisor to U.S. presidents said, "If a speculator is correct half of the
time, he is hitting a good average. Even being right three or four times
out of 10 should yield a person a fortune if he has the sense to cut his
losses quickly on the ventures where he has been wrong."

86
Be Smart from the Start
This point of Baruch's was proven to my satisfaction in the case of an
account I managed many years ago. In 1962, the general market took a
29% nosedive and we were right in only 33% of the commitments made
in this particular account. Yet, the account was ahead at the end of the
year because the average profit on the 33% correct decisions was over
twice the size of the average small losses taken when we were off target.
The whole secret to winning in the stock market is to lose the least
amount possible when you're not right. In other words, in order to win
you've got to recognize when you may be wrong and sell without hesita-
tion to cut short your loss.
But how can you tell when you may be wrong? That's easy. The price
of the stock will drop below your purchase price! Each point your
favorite brainchild descends below your cost increases both the proba-
bility that you are mistaken, as well as the price you are going to pay for
being incorrect.
Are Successful People Lucky
or Always Right?
People think a successful person is either kicky or right most of the
time. This is not so. Successful people make many mistakes. Their suc-
cesses are a result of hard work rather than their being lucky. They suc-
ceed in spite of their mistakes because they try much harder and more
often than the average person does. There just aren't many overnight
successes. Success takes time.
In search of a filament for his electric lamp, Edison carbonized and
tried 6000 different specimens of bamboo. Three of them worked.
Before that, he tried thousands of other items from cotton thread to
chicken feathers.
Babe Ruth tried so hard that he holds the lifetime record for strike-
outs. And Irving Berlin said, "Out of more than 600 songs I have writ-
ten, no more than 50 have been hits. I missed 11 times for every time I
succeeded." The Beatles were turned down by every record company in
England before they finally made it.
I have found over the years that only one or two stocks out of every 10
I bought turned out to be truly outstanding and capable of making sub-
stantial profits. This means in order to get the one or two, you have to
look for and buy 10 different stocks.
If we find the two extraordinary investments, what should we do with
the other eight average or poor choices? Sit with them and hope, like
most people do, or keep trying until we come up with a few more formi-
dable successes.
when to Sell if Your Selection or Timing Might Be Wrong
87
It takes a lot of tries and many misses before you can own and nail
down substantial gains in stocks like Brunswick and Great Western
Financial when they doubled in 1961, Chrysler and Syntex in 1963,
Fairchild Camera and Polaroid in 1965, Control Data in 1967, Levilz
Furniture in 1970-1972, Prime Computer and Humana in 1977-1981,
MCI Communications in 1981-1982, Price Company in 1982-1983,
Microsoft in 1986-1992, Amgen in 1990-1991, and International Game
Technology in 1991-1993. These stocks dazzled the market with gains
ranging from 100% to more than 1000%.
Are You a Speculator or an
Investor?
Before we delve further into the intriguing shell game of when to sell,
let's define two misunderstood words. These words are speculator and
investor.
Bernard Baruch interpreted speculator as follows: "The word specula-
tor comes from the Latin 'speculari' which means to spy and observe. A
speculator, therefore, is a person who observes and acts before it
occurs."
Jesse Livermore, another old-time stock market legend, defined
investor this way: "Investors are the big gamblers. They make a bet, stay
with it, and if it goes wrong, they lose it all."
These definitions are a bit different than those you will read in
Webster's Dictionary. But we know Baruch and Livermore on occasion
made millions of dollars in the stock market. We're not sure about
Webster.
One of my primary goals is to convince you to question many of the
investment ideas, beliefs, and methods you have heard about or used in
the past.
The amount of erroneous information and ignorance about how the
stock market really works and how to succeed in the market is down-
right unbelievable.
How the Normal Investor
Thinks
Let's examine how the normal investor thinks and makes decisions. If
you are a typical investor, you probably keep records of your transac-
tions in the market, perhaps in the following manner:

88
Be Smart from the Start
Buys
100 Navistar
100 Luby's Cafeterias
50 SmithKline Beckman
1 00 Toys R Us
100 Storage Technology
100 H.J. Heinz
60 Wal-Mart Stores
Cost
$27
20
76
30
22
31
55
Current price
$23
30
74
48
15
37
61
When you think about selling a stock, you likely look at your records
to see what price you paid for the stock, don't you? If you have a profit,
you may sell; if you have a loss, you will wait rather than take the loss.
After all, you didn't invest in the market to lose money.
So, in this example, you may decide to sell your Luby's Cafeterias or
Wal-Mart Stores stock because they show a profit. But these are the
stocks you should consider keeping. Instead, you should probably sell
one of the stocks showing a loss, like Navistar or Storage Technology.
If you're the type of person who would have been inclined to sell
Luby's, the entire basis of your sell decision is unwise, resulting from
the "price-paid bias" which 95% of investors have.
Suppose you paid $30 for a stock two years ago. Today it is $34. You
may sell it because you've made a profit. But what does the price you
paid for that stock two years ago have to do with its worth today—or
whether it should be held or sold now?
Suppose you paid $40 for the same stock six months earlier and,
therefore, have a loss today. Does this change its future potential?
Probably not! What you paid for a stock years ago or whether you have a
profit or loss may have little to do with future potential.
When Does a Loss Become a
Loss?
When you say, "I can't sell a stock because I don't want to take a loss,"
you assume that what you want has some bearing on the situation. Yet
the stock does not know who you are, and it doesn't care what you hope
or want.
Furthermore, you may believe that if you sell the stock you will be tak-
ing the loss, but selling doesn't give you the loss; you already have it. If
you think a loss is not incurred until you sell the stock, you may be kid-
ding yourself. The larger the paper loss, the more real it will become.
When to Sell if Your Selection or Timing Might Be Wrong
89
For example, if you paid $40 per share for 100 shares of Ace
Chemical, and it's currently worth $28 per share, you have $2800 worth
of stock that cost you $4000. You have a $1200 loss. Whether you con-
vert it to cash or hold the stock, it is only worth $2800.
You took your loss as this stock dropped in price even though you
didn't sell; now you will probably be better off selling the stock and
going back to a cash position. You can think more objectively with cash
in your stock account than you can if you're worrying about a stock that
has lost money for you. Anyway, there are other securities where your
chance of recouping your loss could be far greater.
Here's another suggestion that may help you decide whether or not
to sell. Pretend you don't own the stock and you have $2800 in the
bank. Then ask yourself this question, "Do I really want to buy this stock
now?" If your answer is "no," then why are you holding it?
A Unique Way to Keep Your
Records
To help avoid the price-paid bias, I suggest you use a completely differ-
ent method of keeping records. At the end of each quarter, figure the
value of each stock position you own by multiplying the current market
price of the stock by the number of shares you own.
Compute the percentage change in price of each stock from the last
date you did this type of analysis. Now list your investments in order of
their relative price performance since your previous evaluation period.
Let's say your Tektronix is down 8%, your Exxon is unchanged, and
Polaroid is up 10%. Your list would start with Polaroid on top, then
Exxon and Tektronix.
At the end of the following quarter, do the same thing. After a few
reviews, you will easily recognize the holdings that are not doing well.
They will be at the bottom of the list, and the ones that performed best
will be at the top.
This method, while not foolproof, does force you to focus your atten-
tion not on what you paid for stocks, but on the relative performance of
your investments in the market. It will help you maintain a clearer per-
spective. Of course, you have to keep records of your costs for tax rea-
sons, but you should use this more realistic method in the management
of your portfolio.
Eliminating the price-paid bias can be profitable and rewarding. If you
base your sell decisions on your cost and hold stocks that are down in
price because you do not want to accept the fact you have made an impru-

90
Be Smart from the Start
dent selection and lost money, you are making decisions exactly the oppo-
site of those you would make if you were running your own business.
The Red Dress Story
The stock market is really no different from your own business.
Investing is a business and should be operated just like a business.
Assume you own a small retail women's clothing store. You have
bought and stocked women's dresses in three colors—yellow, green,
and red. The red dresses are quickly sold out, the green ones are half
sold, and the yellow ones have not sold at all. What do you do about it?
Do you go to your buyer and say, "The red dresses are all sold out.
The yellow ones don't seem to have any demand, but I still think
they're good and besides, yellow is my favorite color, so let's buy some
more of them anyway"?
Certainly not!
The clever merchandiser who survives in the retail business eyes this
predicament objectively and says, "We sure made a mistake. We'd better
eliminate the yellow dresses. Mark them down 10%. Let's have a sale. If
they don't sell at that price, mark them down 20%. Get our money out
of those 'old dogs,' and put it in more of the hot-moving red dresses
that are in demand." This is common sense in a retail business. Do you
do this with your investments? Why not?
Everyone will make buying errors. The buyers for department stores are
professional buyers and even they make mistakes. When you do slip up, as
soon as you recognize it, sell and go on to the next thing. You do not have
to be correct on all your investment decisions to make a net profit.
Anytime a commitment in a security is made, you should define the
potential profit and the possible loss. This is only logical: you would not
buy a stock if there were a potential profit of 20% and a potential loss of
80%, would you? But how do you know this is not the situation when
you buy a stock if you do not attempt to define these factors and oper-
ate according to well-thought-out selling rules? Do you have any specific
selling rules, or are you flying blindly?
I suggest you consider writing down the price at which you expect to
sell if you have a loss, as well as the expected profit potential of all the
securities you purchase. By writing it down, you will focus your atten-
tion later on the fact that the stock has reached one of these levels.
When to Sell if Your Selection or Timing Might Be Wrong
91
Limit Your Losses to 7% or
8% of Your Cost
Individual investors should consider adopting a firm plan to try to limit
the loss on initial invested capital in each stock to an absolute maximum
of 7% or 8%. Because of position size problems and broad diversifica-
tion which lessen risk, most institutional investors do not usually follow
such a quick loss-cutting plan. This is a terrific advantage you, the indi-
vidual investor, have over the institution, so use it.
I am talking about cutting your loss when it is 7% or 8% below the
price you paid. Once you are ahead and have a good profit, you can
afford to, and should, allow the stock more than 7% or 8% room for
normal fluctuations in price. Do not sell a stock just because it's off 7%
to 8% from its peak price.
When the late Gerald M. Loeb of E. F. Hutton was writing his last
book on the stock market, I had the pleasure of discussing this issue
with him in my office. In his first work, The Battle for Investment
Survival, Loeb advocated cutting all losses at 10%. I was curious and
asked him if he followed the 10% loss policy himself. He said, "I would
hope to be out long before they ever reach 10%."
Bill Astrop, president of Astrop Advisory Corporation in Atlanta,
Georgia, suggests a minor revision of the 10% loss-cutting plan. He feels
individual investors should sell half of their position in a stock if it is
down 5% from their cost and the other half once it is down 10% below
the price paid.
To preserve your hard-earned money, I think 7% or 8% should be the
limit. Your overall average of all losses should be less, perhaps 5% or
6% if you are strict and fast on your feet.
There is no rule that says you have to wait until every single loss reach-
es 7% to 8% before you take it. On occasion, you can sense that the mar-
ket or your stock isn't acting right or that you are starting off amiss.
Then you can cut the loss sooner, when a stock may be down only one or
two points.
ALSO, 7% TO 8% BELOW YOUR PURCHASE PRICE IS THE ABSO-
LUTE LIMIT. Once you get to that point, you can no longer hesitate.
You can't think about it or wait a few more days to see what might hap-
pen. It now becomes automatic—no more vacillating—sell, and sell
immediately at the market. The fact that you are down 7% or 8% below
your cost is the reason you are selling. You don't need any other reason.
At this time nothing else should have a bearing on the situation.

92 
Be Smart from the Start
Cutting Losses Is like Buying
an Insurance Policy
This policy of limiting losses is similar to paying insurance premiums.
You reduce your risk to exactly the amount you are willing to take.
Granted, many, many times the stock you sell will immediately turn
around and go up. You will probably get very perturbed and think you
made the wrong decision if the stock afterwards rebounds in price.
If you bought insurance on your car last year and didn't have an acci-
dent, did you waste your money? Are you going to buy the same insur-
ance this year? Of course you are!
Did you buy fire insurance on your home or business last year? If your
home did not burn down last year, are you upset because you made a
bad financial decision?
You don't buy fire insurance because you know your house is going to
burn down. You buy insurance just in case, to protect you from the
remote possibility of a serious loss. It is the same for the winning
investor who cuts losses quickly and closely; he or she wants to protect
against the possible chance of a larger potentially devastating loss from
which it may not be possible to recover.
Some people have even damaged their health agonizing over declining
stocks they were holding. In this situation, it is best to sell and stop worrying.
I know a stockbroker who bought Brunswick in 1961 at $60. When it
dropped to $50, he bought more, and when it dropped to $40, he
added again. When it dropped to $30, he dropped dead on the golf
course. Never argue with the market—your health and peace of mind
are always more important than any stock!
Small losses are cheap insurance and the only kind of insurance you
can buy on your investments. Even if a number of the stocks move up
after you sell, which many of them surely will, you have accomplished
your critical objective of keeping all your losses small. And you still have
your money to try again for a winner in another stock.
If you can keep the average of all your mistakes and losses to 5% or
6%, you will be like the professional football team that opponents can
never score yardage on. If you don't give up many first downs, how can
they ever beat you?
Take Your Losses Quickly and
Your Profits Slowly
There is an old investment saying that the first loss in the market is the
smallest loss. In my view, the way to make investment decisions is to take
your losses quickly and your profits slowly. Yet most investors get emo-
When to Sell if Your Selection or Timing Might Be Wrong
93
Even after all this explanation, most investors will still ask, "Shouldn't
we sit with stocks rather than selling and taking a loss? How about unusual
situations where some bad news suddenly hits and causes price declines?
Does this loss-cutting procedure apply all the time, or are there excep-
tions—like a company has a good, new product?" It doesn't change the sit-
uation one bit. You must protect your hard-earned pool of capital.
Letting your losses run is the most serious mistake made by almost all
investors! You positively must accept that mistakes in either timing or
selection of stocks are going to be made by even the most professional
investors. In fact, I would go so far as to say if you aren't willing to cut
short and take your losses, then you probably should not buy stocks.
Would you drive your car down the street without brakes?
All Common Stocks Arc
Speculative
There is considerable speculation in all common stocks, regardless of
their name, quality, or purported blue chip status.
Every 50% loss began as a 10% or 20% loss. Having the raw courage
to sell and cheerfully take your loss is the only way you can protect your-
self against the possibility of greater losses. Decision and action should
be instantaneous and simultaneous. To be a winner, you have to learn
to make decisions.
If a stock gets away from you and the loss becomes larger than 10% or
15%, which can occasionally happen to anyone, the stock normally
should be sold anyway.
In fact, in my experience the ones that get away from you for larger
than normal losses are usually the really awful selections that must be
sold. It is wise to remind yourself, "If I let a stock drop 50%, I must
make a 100% gain on the next stock just to get even, and how often do I
buy stocks that double?"
It is a dangerous fallacy to assume that because a stock goes down, it
has to come back up. Many don't, and some take years to recover.
American Telephone and Telegraph hit a high of $75 in 1964 and took
20 years to come back.
"I'm A Long-Term Investor;
I'm Not Worried; I'm Still
Getting My Dividends"
Another risky statement is to say to yourself, "I'm not worried about my
stocks being down because they are good stocks, and I'm still getting my
dividends." This is naive because good stocks can go down as much as

94
Be Smart from the Start
might not be good stocks in the first place. It may be just your personal
opinion that they are good stocks.
Furthermore, if your stocks are down 25% in value, isn't it rather
absurd to say you're all right because you are getting a 4% yield? A 25%
loss plus a 4% income gain makes a big fat 21% net loss.
If you aspire to be a successful investor, you must face facts—most of
the reactions you have about taking losses are rationalizations, because
no one wants to take losses. You have to do many things you don't want
to do to increase your chances of success in the stock market. You must
develop exact rules and tough-minded selling disciplines.
Should You Average Down in
Price?
One of the worst mistakes I have seen some stockbrokers make is to be
reluctant to call customers whose stocks are down in price from what they
paid for them. That is the very time a client is unsure and may need some
help and reassurance. To shirk duty in the difficult periods is not very
professional and shows a lack of courage, or "guts," under pressure.
About the only sin that is worse is for brokers to take themselves off
the hook by advising customers to average down and buy more of the
stock that already shows a loss. If a broker advised me to do this, I would
close my account and look for a smarter broker.
Everyone loves to buy stocks; no one loves to sell stocks. As long as
you hold a stock, you still have hope it might come back up at least
enough to get you out even. Once you sell, you abandon all hope and
accept the cold reality of defeat. Investors are always hoping rather than
being realistic. You just can't afford to have a love affair with any stock.
Let's see where the real problem lies. Does the fact that you want a
stock to go up so you can at least get out even have anything to do with
the action of the stock market?
The stock market only obeys the law of supply and demand. So try to
overcome this harmful emotion because it has absolutely nothing to do
with the action of your stocks.
A great trader once said, "There are only two emotions in the mar-
ket—hope and fear. The only problem is we hope when we should fear
and we fear when we should hope."
The Turkey Story
Many years ago, I heard a story by Fred C. Kelly, the author of Why You
Win or Lose, that illustrates perfectly how the conventional investor
When to Sell if Your Selection or Timing Might Be Wrong
95
A little boy was walking down the road when he came upon an old
man trying to catch wild turkeys. The man had a turkey trap, a crude
contrivance consisting of a big box with the door hinged at the top.
This door was kept open by a prop to which was tied a piece of twine
leading back a hundred feet or more to the operator. A thin trail of
corn scattered along a path lured turkeys to the box. Once inside the
turkeys found an even more plentiful supply of corn. When enough
turkeys had wandered inside the box, the old man would jerk away the
prop and let the door fall shut. Having once shut the door, he couldn't
open it again without going up to the box and this would scare away any
turkeys lurking outside. The time to pull away the prop was when as
many turkeys were inside as one could reasonably expect.
One day he had a dozen turkeys in his box. Then one sauntered out,
leaving 11. "Gosh, I wish I had pulled the string when all 12 were
there," said the old man. "I'll wait a minute and maybe the other one
will go back."
But while he waited for the twelfth turkey to return, two more walked
out on him. "I should have been satisfied with 11," the trapper said.
"Just as soon as I get one more back, I'll pull the string."
But three more walked out. Still the man waited. Having once had 12
turkeys, he disliked going home with less than eight. He couldn't give
up the idea that some of the original number would return. When final-
ly only one turkey was left in the trap, he said, "I'll wait until he walks
out or another goes in, and then I'll quit." The solitary turkey went to
join the others, and the man returned empty-handed.
The analogy to the psychology of the normal investor is amazingly close.
Now you know the real secret to reducing stock market risk...STOP
COUNTING TURKEYS AND GET RID OF YOUR YELLOW DRESSES!
Never Lose Your Confidence
One last critical reason for taking losses before they have a chance to
genuinely hurt you is that you must never lose your self-confidence and
courage to make future decisions.
If you don't sell to curtail your losses when you begin to get into trou-
ble, you can easily lose your confidence to act and make buy decisions in
the future. In my book, the first and most important rule for beginners or
experienced investors in the stock market is to trim all losses quickly.
There was ample time to sell and cut short losses during September and
early October 1987 before Black Monday's 500-point break in mid-
October 1987. The market's correction actually began on August 26.
Wall Street is human nature on daily display. Buying and selling
stocks orooerlv and makine a net profit is alwavs a complicated affair.

96
Be Smart from the Start
And human nature being what it is, 90% of the people in the stock mar-
ket, professionals and amateurs alike, simply haven't done enough
homework.
They haven't really studied the problem to find out what they are
doing right and wrong, and they haven't studied in enough detail to
understand what makes a successful stock go up and down. There is no
luck to it, it's not a total mystery, and it's certainly not a matter of ran-
dom walk, like some inexperienced university professors believe.
There aren't too many people who are good at stock selection, but
there are probably more than you realize. They are hard to find
because they are certainly in the minority, perhaps one out of every
twenty or thirty people in the market.
The fascinating point is that investors can be good at stock selection
because they've studied, worked, and acquired the right understanding
and experience, but they can also be ignorant about how and why and
when to sell their stocks.
Very few people sell well. Selling a stock correctly is the toughest job
and the one least understood by everyone. The next chapter will discuss
when to sell and take your profits.
In short, if you want to make money in the stock market, you need a
specific defensive plan for cutting your losses quickly and you need to
develop the decisiveness and discipline to make these tough, hard-head-
ed business decisions without wavering.
Remember, there are no good stocks—they are all bad...unless they
go up.
10
When to Sell
and Take Your Profit
Common stock is just like merchandise that is bought and sold for a
profit. You, as the merchant, must sell your merchandise in order to
realize a profit. It is best to learn to sell on the way up while your stock
is still advancing and looks strong to everyone else. By doing this, you
will avoid getting caught in the 20% to 40% corrections which occur
periodically in market leaders and cause great downside portfolio
volatility.
It is far better to sell early. If you are not early, you will be late; you'll
never sell at the exact top, so stop kicking yourself when a stock goes
higher after you sell. The object is to make and take worthwhile gains
and not get excited, optimistic, or greedy as a stock's price advance gets
stronger! The old saying is, "Bulls make money and bears make money,
but pigs don't."
Bernard Baruch, the financier who built a fortune in the stock mar-
ket, said, "Repeatedly...I have sold a stock while it still was rising—and
that has been one reason why I have held onto my fortune. Many a
time, I might have made a good deal more by holding a stock, but I
would also have been caught in the fall when the price of the stock col-
lapsed."
Rothschild's Rule for Success
When asked if there was a technique for making money on the stock
exchange, Nathan Rothschild said, "There certainly is. I never buy at
the bottom and I always sell too soon."

go 
Be Smart from the Start
Joe Kennedy's Stock Market
Secret
"Only a fool holds out for die top dollar," said Joe Kennedy, one-time
Wall Street speculator and the father of former President John F.
Kennedy. The object is to get out while a stock is up, before it has a
chance to break. Gerald M. Loeb states, "Once the price has risen into
estimated normal or overvaluation areas, the amount held should be
reduced steadily as quotations advance." (At this point it's all right to ask
yourself, "Why didn't I sell when it was going up and looked so strong?")
One simply must get out while the getting is good. The secret is to
hop off the elevator on one of the floors on the way up. In the stock
market one good profit in hand is worth two on paper.
The basic objective of every account should be to first show a net
profit. To retain profits, you must sell and take them.
Develop a Profit-and-Loss
Plan
If you want to be a big success investing or trading in the stock market, I
believe you must operate with a set of rules and a profit-and-loss plan.
I'm going to share with you the rules and plan I devised when I was
between 26 and 28 years old and had been a stockbroker with Hayden,
Stone for less than three years. These rules helped me to buy a seat on
the New York Stock Exchange at the end of 1963 and start my own firm.
The buy rules were initially developed in January of 1960 after analyz-
ing in depth the three best-performing mutual funds of the prior two
years. The Dreyfus Fund, from 1957-1959, led in performance and in
many cases had results twice as good as its competitors.
So I got copies of every Dreyfus quarterly report and prospectus for
that time period and calculated the average cost of each new stock posi-
tion they purchased. Next I obtained a chart book of stocks, and for each
new stock Dreyfus had bought, I marked in red ink on the chart the aver-
age price they paid during the quarter the new position was purchased.
After looking at over 100 new stocks the then tiny Dreyfus Fund had
bought over several years, I made quite a stunning surprise discovery.
Every single new stock was purchased at the highest price the stock
had sold for in the past year. In other words, if a stock bounced from
$40 to $50 for many months, Dreyfus bought as soon as it made a new
high in price and traded between $50 and $51. The stocks also formed
When to Sell and Take Your Profit
99
certain types of recognizable chart-price patterns prior to going into
new high ground.
Jack Dreyfus Was a Chartist
Jack Dreyfus was a chartist and a tape reader. He bought all his stocks
based on market action, and he only bought when the price broke into
new high ground. He was also beating the pants off every one of his
competitors that depended solely on fundamental analytical opinions
and ignored the market behavior of stocks.
Jack's research department in those early big-performance days prior
to his retirement consisted primarily of three young turks in their 20s.
They posted to large oversized charts the day's price and volume action
on hundreds of listed stocks.
Shortly after that, two small funds run by Fidelity in Boston began
doing the same thing. They also produced superior results. Almost all
the stocks these three funds bought also had strong increases in their
quarterly earnings reports.
My first rules were as follows:
1. Concentrate on listed stocks that sell for over $20 a share and that
have at least some institutional acceptance.
2. The company's earnings per share should have increased in each of
the past five years, and the current quarterly earnings must be up at
least 20%.
3. Timing-wise, the stock should be about to make a new high in price
after emerging from a sound correction and price consolidation
period. This should be accompanied by a volume increase of at least
50% above the stock's average daily volume.
The first stock I bought under this set of rules was Universal Match in
February 1960, and it was fantastic. It doubled in only 16 weeks, but I
failed to make much because I didn't have much money to invest then.
I also got nervous and sold it too quickly.
Later that year, following my well-defined game plan, I selected
Procter & Gamble, Reynolds Tobacco, and MGM, all of which over the
next year had outstanding moves. However, my problem was still that I
was relatively young, just getting started, didn't have many customers,
and had very little money of my own to invest.

100
Be Smart from the Start
About this time, I was accepted to the Harvard Business School via
the first Program for Management Development (PMD). I was plain
lucky since I was a year below their minimum age requirement.
Jesse Livermore and
Pyramiding
At the business school, in my extra time, I read a number of business
and investment books in the library. The best one was called How to
Trade in Stocks by J. Livermore. From his book, I learned that your
objective in the market was not to be right but to make big money when
you were right.
I adopted his method of averaging up, or pyramiding, when a stock
moved up after purchase. This helped to concentrate my buying when I
seemed to be right. If I was wrong and the stock dropped a certain
amount below my cost, I sold the stock to cut short the loss.
In the first half of 1961 my rules and plan worked great. Some of the
top winners I bought that year were Great Western Financial, Brunswick,
Kerr-McGee, Crown Cork & Seal, AMF, and Certain-teed. But by sum-
mer, all was not well.
I had bought exactly the right stocks at the right time and had pyra-
mided with additional buys so I had good positions and profits. But
when the stocks finally topped, I held on too long and watched my prof-
its vanish. When you snooze, you lose.
It was hard to swallow: I had been dead right on my stock selections
for over a year and just broke even.
Learning by Post-Analysis of
My Failures
I was so mad that I spent the last six months of 1961 carefully analyzing
every transaction made during the prior year. Much like the medical
profession and the Civil Aeronautics Board conduct postmortem opera-
tions and postcrash investigations, I marked with a red pen on charts
exactly where each buy and sell decision was made and overlaid the
general market averages on each chart.
Eventually the answer to the problem became crystal clear. 1 definite-
ly knew how to select leading stocks but I had no selling plan. I simply
had no rules, no plans, and no idea about when to sell and take a profit.
When to Sell and Take Your Profit
101
Like the majority of people's, my stocks went up and then down like a
yo-yo and my paper profits were wiped out.
My Mistakes in Certain-teed
There was one stock I handled particularly poorly. I bought Certain-
teed in the low $20s and sold it for a two- or three-point gain because I
was scared out during a weak moment in the market. Certain-teed then
proceeded to triple in price. I was right at the right time but didn't rec-
ognize what I had and failed to capitalize on this phenomenal situation.
This in-depth postanalysis of my several failures was the key turning
point to getting totally on the right track and succeeding in the future.
Have you ever analyzed your failures to try arid learn from them? Most
people don't.
A Revised Profit-and-Loss
Plan
I found that successful stocks, after breaking out, tend to move up 20%
to 25% and then decline, build a new base, and in some cases resume
their advance. Therefore, I created a rule that I would buy exactly at the
pivot buy point, not pyramid more than 5% past the buy point and
would sell each stock when it was up 20% from the breakout point.
The Certain-teed case had been so powerful, however, that it had
increased 20% in just two weeks' time. This was the type of big winner I
was hoping to find and capitalize on the next time around.
Therefore, one important exception was made in the "sell at + 20%
rule." If the stock was so strong that it vaulted 20% in less than eight
weeks, the stock had to be held at least eight weeks. Then it would be
analyzed to see if the stock should be held for a possible six-month, long-
term capital gain (six months was the capital gains period at that time). If
stocks declined below their purchase price by 8%, they would be sold and
the loss taken.
In summary, here was the revised profit-and-loss plan: Take 20% prof-
its when you have them (except with the most powerful of all stocks)
and cut losses at 8%.
The plan had several enormous advantages. You could be wrong twice
and right once and still not get into financial trouble. When you were
right and wanted to follow up with another buy in the same stock a few

102
Be Smart from the Start
points higher, you were frequently forced into a decision to sell one of
your weakest-performing holdings. The questionable money continually
was force-fed into the best investments.
Also, you were utilizing your money in a far more efficient mariner.
You could make two or three 20% plays in a good year, and you did not
have to sit through so many prolonged, unproductive corrections in
price while a stock built a whole new base for many months.
A 20% gain in three to six months was substantially more productive
than a 20% gain that took 12 months to achieve. Two 20% gains in one
year equaled a 40% annual rate of return, and if you were using 50%
margin, your return would be a whopping 80%.
How I Discovered the General
Market System
I made one other profitable observation from analyzing all of my dumb
mistakes. Most stocks that topped had done so because the general mar-
ket started into a decline of 10% or more.
This conclusion led to my system of interpreting the daily general
market averages to establish the true trend and crucial changes in direc-
tion of the overall market.
Three months later, by April 1, 1962, my selling rules forced me out
of every stock. I was 100% in cash, with no idea the market was headed
for a real crash.
About that time I had just finished reading Reminiscences of a Stock
Operator by LeFevre and was struck by the parallel between the 1907
stock market panic, which was discussed in detail, and what seemed to
be happening in April 1962.
Since I was 100% in cash and my daily Dow analysis said the market
was weak at that point, I began to sell short stocks like Certain-teed and
Alside (an earlier sympathy play to Certain-teed). For this, I got into
trouble with Hayden, Stone's home office on Wall Street because it had
just recommended Certain-teed as a buy, and I was going around telling
everyone it was a short sale.
Later in the year Korvette was sold short over $40. The profits from
the short sales were fairly substantial.
By October 1962 and the Cuban crisis, 1 was again in cash. A day or
two after the Russians backed down from President Kennedy's naval
blockade, on the first follow-through day in the Dow Jones, I bought the
first stock of the new bull market—Chrysler—at $58.
Throughout all of 1963 my rules were strictly applied, and they
worked so well that the worst performing account I managed in 1963
When to Sell and Take Your Profit
103
was up 115%. It was a cash account. Other accounts were up several
hundred percent. There were many individual stock losses, but they
were usually small, averaging 5% to 6%, and the profits were awesome
when we were right because of the concentrated position sizes from
pyramiding.
Starting with only $4000 or $5000 which I had earned and saved from
salary, plus some borrowed money arid use of full margin, I had three
back-to-back big winners—Korvette on the short side in late 1962,
Chrysler on the buy side, and Syntex, which was bought at $100 with the
Chrysler profit in June 1963. By the end of eight weeks Syntex was up
40%, short-term gains were building, and I decided to play this power-
ful stock out for a six-month capital gain.
By the fall of 1963, the profits were over $200,000 and I decided to
buy a seat on the New York Stock Exchange. So don't ever let anyone
tell you it can't be done!
Many long evenings of study at last led to rules, disciplines, and a
plan that finally worked. Luck had nothing to do with it; it was persis-
tence and hard work. You cannot expect to watch television or drink
beer every evening and find the answers to something as complex as the
stock market or the American economy.
Anyone can do anything in America by working at it. If you at times
get discouraged, go back and put in some detailed "extra effort" and
don't give up. It's the time you put in after 9 to 5 Monday through
Friday that ultimately makes the difference.
Other Prime Selling Pointers
There are a number of additional selling guidelines I developed as a
result of the six-month intensive analysis of my past ignorant selling mis-
takes. Following is a list and explanation of many of them:
1. Buying right solves half of your selling problem. If you buy exactly
at the right time off a proper base structure in the first place and
do not chase or pyramid a stock when it is extended in price too
far past a buy point, you will be in a position to sit through most
. normal corrections in the price of your stock. Winning stocks sel-
dom drop 8% below a correct pivot-point buying price.
2. Beware of the big-block selling you see on the ticker tape just after
you have bought a stock during a bull market. The selling might be
emotional, uninformed, temporary, or not as large, relative to past
volume, as it appears. The best of stocks can have sharp sell-offs for
a few davs or a week. You should refer to a chart of the stock for

104
Be Smart from the Start
overall perspective to avoid getting scared or shaken out in what
may just be a normal pullback.
3. If after a stock's price is extended from a proper base, its price
closes for a larger increase than on any previous up days, watch
out! This move usually occurs at or very close to a stock's peak.
4. The ultimate top may occur on the heaviest volume day since the
beginning of the advance.
5. Sell if a stock advance gets so active that it has a rapid price runup
for two or three weeks (eight to twelve days). This is called climax
(blow-off) top activity.
6. Sell if a stock runs up on a stock split for one or two weeks (usually
+ 25% or + 30% and, in a few rare instances, + 50%). If a stock's
price is extended from its base and a stock split is announced, in
many instances the stock should be sold.
7. Big investors must sell when they have buyers to absorb their stock;
therefore, consider selling if a stock runs up and then good news
or major publicity (a cover article in Business Week, for example) is
released.
8. New highs on decreased or poor volume means there is temporari-
ly no demand for the stock at that level and selling may soon over-
come the stock.
9. After an advance, heavy volume without further upside price
progress signals distribution.
10. Tops will show arrows pointing down on a stock's daily chart (clos-
ing at lows of the daily price range on several days—in other words,
full retracement of a day's advance).
11. When it's exciting and obvious to everyone that a stock is going
higher, sell, because it is too late! Jack Dreyfus said, "Sell when
there is an overabundance of optimism. When everyone is bubbling
optimism and running around trying to get everyone else to buy,
they are fully invested. At this point, all they can do is talk. They
can't push the market up anymore. It takes buying power to do
that." Buy when you are scared to death and others are unsure.
Wait until you are happy and tickled to death to sell.
12. If a stock that has been advancing rapidly is extended from its base
and opens on a gap up in price, the advance is probably near its
peak. A two-point gap in a stock's price would occur if it closed at
its high of $50 for the day and the next morning opened at $52
and held above $52 during the day.
When to Sell and Take Your Profit
105
13. Sell if a stock's price breaks badly for several days and does not rally.
14. Consider selling if a stock takes off for a good advance over several
weeks and then retraces all of that advance.
15. When quarterly earnings increases slow materially or earnings actu-
ally decline for two consecutive quarters, in most cases sell.
16. Consider selling if there is no confirming price strength by another
important member of the same group.
17. Be careful of selling on bad news or rumors; they are usually of
temporary influence. Rumors are sometimes started to catch the
little fish off balance.
18. Try to avoid selling on shakeouts (below major price-support
areas).
19. If you didn't sell early while the stock was still advancing, sell on
the way down from the peak. After the first break, some stocks may
once pull back up in price.
20. After a stock declines 8% or so from its peak, in some cases exami-
nation of the previous runup, the top, and the decline may help
determine if the advance may be over or if a normal 8% to 12%
correction is in progress. You may occasionally want to sell if a
decline from peak exceeds 12% or 15%.
21. If a stock already has made an extended advance and suddenly
makes its greatest one-day price drop since the beginning of the
move, consider selling, but only if confirmed by other signals.
22. When you see initial heavy selling near the top, the next recovery
will either follow through weaker in volume, show poor price
recovery, or last a shorter number of days. Sell on the second or
third day of poor rally; it will be the last good chance to sell before
trend lines and support areas are broken.
23. Sell if a stock closes the end of the week below a major long-term
uptrend line or breaks a key price-support area on overwhelming
volume.
24. The number of down days in price versus up days in price will
change after a stock starts down.
25. Wait for a second confirmation of major changes in the general
market, and don't buy back stocks you sold just because they can
be bought cheaper.
26. Learn from your past selling mistakes. Do your own post-analysis by
plotting on charts your past buy-and-sell points.

106
Be Smart from the Start
27. Sell quickly before it becomes completely clear that a stock should
be sold. Selling after a stock has broken an obvious support level
could be a poor decision because the stock could pull back after
touching off stop orders and attracting short sellers.
28. Always project the week you can expect capital-gains selling by
those who bought in volume at the original breakout point from a
base. (This applies only if current tax laws favor capital gains.)
29. In a few cases, you should sell if a stock hits its upper channel line.
(Channel lines are drawn to connect the lows and connect the
highs on a stock's price chart.) Stocks surging above their upper
channel lines should normally be sold.
30. Sell when your stock makes a new high in price if it's off a third- or
fourth-stage base. The third chance is seldom a charm in the mar-
ket. It has become too obvious and almost everyone sees it.
31. Sell on new price highs off a wide-and-loose, erratic chart price for-
mation.
32. Sell on new highs if a stock has a weak base with much of the price
work in the lower half of the base or below its 200-day moving aver-
age price line.
33. In some cases, sell if a stock breaks down on the largest weekly vol-
ume in its prior five years.
34. Some stocks can be sold when they are 70% to 100% above their
200-day moving average price line.
35. After a prolonged upswing, if a stock's 200-day moving average line
of its price turns into a downtrend, consider selling the stock.
36. Poor relative price strength can be a reason for selling. Consider
selling when a stock's relative strength on a scale from 1 to 99
drops below 70.
Before going to the next subject, a few words or rules should be suggest-
ed on the question of when to be patient and hold a stock. The decision
to sit tight is important and closely related to making selling decisions.
When to Be Patient
and Hold a Stock
1. After a new purchase, draw a red defensive sell line on a daily or
weekly graph at the precise price level where you will sell and cut
When to Sell and Take Your Profit
107
your loss. In the first 1 /£ to 2 years of a new bull market, you may
want to give stocks this much room on the downside and hold until
the price touches the sell line before taking defensive action.
The defensive, loss-cutting sell line may in some instances be raised
but kept below the low of the first normal correction after your initial
purchase. If you raise your sell point, don't move it up too close to the
current price, because any normal little weakness will shake you out of
your stock. If your stock increases 15% or more after a correct pur-
chase, move the defensive sell line up to less than 5% below the pivot
purchase price.
I do not think you should continue to follow a stock up by raising
stop-loss orders because you will be forced out near the low of an
inevitable, natural correction. Once your stock is 15% above your pur-
chase price, you can begin to concentrate on the definite price where
you will sell on the way up to nail down your short-term profit.
2. Your objective is to buy the best stock with the best earnings at exact-
ly the right time and have the patience to hold it until you have
been proven right or wrong. You should give securities 13 weeks
after your first purchase week before you conclude that a stock that
hasn't moved is a dull, faulty selection. This, of course, applies only
if the stock did not reach your defensive sell price first.
3. Any stock that rises close to 20% should never be allowed to drop
back into the loss column. For example, if you buy a stock at $50
and it shoots up to $60 (+20%) and you don't take the profit when
you have it, there is no intelligent reason to ever let it drop all the
way back to $50 or below and create a loss. You may feel embar-
rassed, ridiculous, and not too bright buying at $50, watching it hit
$60, and then selling at $50 to $51, but you've already made the mis-
take of not taking your profit. Avoid making a second mistake and
letting it develop into a loss.
4. Always pay attention to the general market. If you initiate new pur-
chases when the market averages are topping and beginning to
reverse direction, you will likely have trouble holding the stocks
bought. (Most breakouts will fail.)
5. Major advances require time to complete. Don't take profits during
the first eight weeks of a move unless the stock gets into serious trou-
ble or is having a two- or three-week "climax" rapid runup on a stock
split. Stocks that show a 20% profit in less than eight weeks should
be held through the eight weeks unless they are of poor quality with-
out institutional sponsorship or strong group action. In certain
cases, dramatic stocks advancing 20% or more in only four or five

108
Be Smart from the Start
weeks are the most powerful stocks of all, capable of increases of
100%, 200%, or more. You can try for long-term moves in many of
them, once your account shows a good profit and you are ahead for
the year.
6. If you own a dynamic leader or a stock belonging to a leading group,
you may want to hold it at least until its weekly close is below its 10-
week moving-average price line on increased volume. Some out-
standing leaders go an amazing distance before this occurs.
7. If possible, try to hold through the stock's first short-term correction
once you already have a profit.
8. Holding for a long-term gain during the early stage of a new bull
market, in many cases, may force you to stick to your position long
enough to make a big gain. Remember, the object is not to be right,
but to make big money when you are right.
According to Livermore, "It never is your thinking that makes big
money, it's the sitting." Investors who can be right and sit tight are
uncommon. It takes time for a stock to make a large gain. The first two
years of a new bull market typically provide your best and safest period
for courage, patience, and profitable sitting. If you really know a com-
pany and its products well, you will have the additional confidence
required to sit tight through several inevitable normal corrections.
Achieving giant profits in a stock usually takes one to three years time
and patience.
You've just read one of the most valuable chapters in this book. It
should be worth several hundred times what you paid for How to Make
Money in Stocks—if you will review and understand what you've read
and adopt a disciplined profit-and-loss plan for your own investments.
It might even be a good idea to reread this chapter once every year.
11
Should You Diversify,
Invest for the Long Pull,
Buy on Margin, Sell Short?
Do you remember when Mobil diversified into the retail business by
buying Montgomery Ward? It never worked. Neither have hundreds of
other corporate diversification attempts.
For years you have been told "Don't put all your eggs in one basket,"
haven't you? However, my experience is that few people do more than
one or two things exceedingly well. The jack-of-all-trades and master of
none is seldom a dramatic success in any field.
The best example of diversification in the corporate world is the con-
glomerate. Most are not real winners. They are too big, too inefficient,
too spread out, and are involved in so many businesses they have trou-
ble concentrating and creating profitable growth.
Would you like to go to a dentist who spent part of his time doing engi-
neering on the side, wrote music, did a little cabinetmaking, and worked
as an auto mechanic, plumber, and accountant on the weekends?
The more you diversify, the less you know about any one area. Many
investors overdiversify. The best results are achieved through concentra-
tion: putting all your eggs in just a few baskets that you know a great
deal about and continuing to watch those baskets very carefully. The
more stocks you own, the slower you may be to react and take selling
action to raise sufficient cash when the next serious bear market begins.

110 
Be Smart from the Start
How Many Stocks Should
You Own?
An individual investor with even a large portfolio of a million dollars
need not own more than six or seven well-selected securities. Broad
diversification is a hedge for lack of knowledge, or ignorance.
Most people with $20,000 to $100,000 to invest should consider limit-
ing themselves to four or five carefully chosen stocks. Once you own
five stocks and a tempting situation comes along that you want to buy,
you should muster up the discipline to sell off your least attractive
investment. If you have a total of $5000 to $20,000 to invest, three
stocks might be a reasonable maximum. A $3000 account could be con-
fined to two equities. Keep things manageable!
The more stocks you own, the harder it is to maintain proper track of
them. It's a little like the starry-eyed fellow who made money in his
pizza stand but decided to expand and open 20 pizza stands. He had
quite a bit more to handle and found the additional outlets caused
more problems and losses than he had anticipated.
You can also diversify your purchases over a period of time. When I
owned Amgen during 1990 arid 1991, the position was purchased on
more than 100 different days. It was spread out over a period of time
and add-on buys were only made when there was a significant cushion
or gain on earlier buys. If the market price was 20 points over my aver-
age cost and a new buy point occurred, additional buys were made. This
is not a method newcomers to the market should attempt because it
needs to be done correctly and you also have to be willing to sell if
things aren't working out as expected.
The winning investor's objective should be to have one or two big
winners rather than dozens of very small profits. It is much better to
have a number of small losses and a few very big profits.
One way to maneuver your portfolio toward concentrated positions is
to follow up and make one or two smaller additional buys in stocks that
have advanced 2% to 3% or so above your original or last purchase
price. At the same time, sell and eliminate those that start to show loss-
es, before they become big losses.
Have you ever bought a stock that had a giant price increase, but you
owned a smaller number of shares of it than you had in other more
uneventfully performing stocks? Using this follow-up purchasing proce-
dure, in time, should result in your having more of your money stashed
in just a few of your best stock investments. While no system is perfect,
this method is more realistic and has a better chance of eventually achiev-
ing important results than does a haphazardly diversified portfolio.
Should You Diversify, Invest for the Long Pull, Buy on Margin, Sell Short?
Ill
Should You Invest for the
Long Pull, or Trade?
If you decide to concentrate, should you invest for the long pull, or
trade? The time period is not the main issue. Buying the right stock —
the very best stock — at precisely the right time is the imperative issue.
Sell this stock whenever the market or your various sell rules tell you it
is time to sell. This time period could either be short-term or long-term.
Let your rules and the market decide and determine how long to hold
each stock.
If you do this, some of your winners will be held for three months,
some for six months and a few for one, two, three years or even more.
Most of your losses will be held for a shorter time period, normally from
a few weeks up to three months.
No well-run portfolio should ever have losses that have been carried
for six months or more. Keep your portfolio clean and in touch with
the times. Good gardeners always weed the flower patch.
Do Not Day Trade
One type of stock trading you definitely do not want to engage in is day
trading, or day-to-day trading, where you try to buy and sell a stock on
the same day. The reason is simple. You are dealing with minor daily
fluctuations which are much harder to determine than are basic trends.
There is not enough profit potential in daily trading to offset the
commissions you generate and the inevitable losses that occur. As men-
tioned before, you also should not follow a program of taking short,
two-point profits, because again your margin of profit is too small to off-
set larger losses, which in time must happen. Don't try to make money
so fast. You can't build Rome in a day.
Should You Use Margin?
Is it safe or wise to invest on margin (borrowed money)? Or should you
buy stocks on a cash basis only?
In the first year or two while an investor is learning, it is much safer to
restrict activities to a cash basis. However, with a few years' experience,
a sound plan, and a set of rules, you could consider buying on margin
(using borrowed money from your stockbrokerage firm), particularly if
you are young and still working.

112
Be Smart from the Start
It is absolutely essential that you understand that when the general
market declines and your stocks start sinking in price, you will lose your
capital twice as fast on 50% margin as you would if you were invested on
a cash basis. This dictates that you cut losses quickly and get yourself off
of margin when major general market deterioration begins.
A margin account should not be fully margined all the time. At times
you will have large cash reserves and no margin, and at other times you will
be invested on a cash basis. At other points you will be using a small part of
your margin buying power, and in a few instances, where you are making
genuine progress in a bull market, you may be fully invested on margin.
The margin interest expense, depending on current laws which con-
stantly change, might be tax deductible. However, in certain periods,
margin interest rates can become so high that the probability of sub-
stantial success may be more restricted.
The best time to use margin is usually during the first two years of a
new bull market. Once you recognize a new bear market, you should
get off margin immediately and raise as much cash as possible. If you
are unquestionably active and more seasoned, you may consider limited
short selling.
What to Do about a Margin
Call
One last bit of wisdom. Never answer a margin call. If the stocks you
have in your margin account collapse in value to a point where your
stockbroker issues a margin call for you to put up money or sell stock,
don't put up money—think about selling stock. Nine times out of ten
you will be better off, because the marketplace is telling you that you
are on the wrong path and things aren't working. So sell and cut back
your risk level. Why put good money after bad?
To buy on margin you will need to sign a margin agreement with your
stockbrokerage firm and have your stock certificates held in street name
(the brokerage company name). As long as you're dealing with an estab-
lished New York Stock Exchange firm, this should not create risk for you.
There is a great advantage in having stock held in street name, as it
avoids tremendous paperwork and time on your part that would other-
wise be spent keeping up with stock certificates, dividends, and stock
splits. It also eliminates time and trouble taking securities back and
forth to your broker each time you conduct a transaction. And it averts
problems and notorious delays with transfer agents, whose work it is to
collect, register, transfer, and mail certificates. The itemized monthly
statements of your account, provided by most brokers, will also give you
Should You Diversify, Invest for the Long Pull, Buy on Margin, Sell Short? 
113
Should You Sell Short?
In 1976, I wrote a booklet on short selling. Not much has changed over
the years on the subject of short selling. It is a topic few investors under-
stand, and in which even fewer succeed.
Why would you ever want to sell short? If you think the market is
going to decline substantially or a certain stock is ready to cave in, you
could sell the stock short even though you don't own it by borrowing
the stock from your broker. If the stock falls in price as you expected,
you can buy it at a lower price (this is called covering your short posi-
tion) and pocket the difference in price as your profit.
Of course, it seldom works out so well. Usually the stock you sell short
expecting a colossal price break will do the most unexpected thing—it
will immediately begin creeping up in price.
When it goes up you will lose money; therefore, my first rule is don't
sell anything short during a bull market. Why fight the general tide?
Remember this, because sooner or later you may try it and will have to
find out the hard way, just like you learned that signs saying "wet paint"
usually mean what they say. Save the short selling for bear markets. Your
odds will be a little better.
The second rule is never sell short a thinly capitalized (small number of
shares outstanding) stock; it's too easy for the stock to be run up on you
(that's called a short squeeze, and it doesn't feel very good when you are
in one).
To be effective at short selling, you have to be in gear with the start of
a general market decline and short off the behavior of the daily market
averages. This requires the ability to interpret accurately the daily Dow
Jones Industrials or S&P Index, as discussed in the chapter on deter-
mining general market direction, and the ability to select stocks that
have had a tremendous runup and have definitely topped out.
Flawless timing is the whole game. You can be right but too early and
be forced to cover at a loss. Don't kid yourself, you have to take and cut
losses when you sell short just the same as you have a loss-cutting policy
when you buy stocks. Otherwise, the sky is the limit, and a short-selling
mistake could cause sickening losses.
The two best chart price patterns for selling short are:
1. The head and shoulders top. The right shoulder should be slightly
lower than the left, and the best time to short is after the second or
third upward pullback in price in the right shoulder is about over.
In former big leaders, the several upward pullbacks can be 20% or
more from the stock's low point in right shoulder. It also helps if the
stock's quarterly earnings are showinw substantial riar^i**r-*t;~— -- -•*-

Be Smart from the Start
114
rate of increase or have turned down. Furthermore, the stock's rela-
tive strength line should be on a clear downtrend over at least 3 or 4
months or longer so you can be more confident that the security has
definitely topped. (Most short selling is done at the wrong time.)
2. Third or fourth stage cup with handle or other similar patterns that
have definitely failed after an attempted breakout. The stock should
be just picking up trading volume and starting to break down below
the handle area. How to recognize chart patterns is discussed in
Chapter 14.
There are a few other fine points to mention. If you short additional
stock, make sure you are ahead on your first short position before you
follow up with more short sales. And don't short larger amounts as the
stocks drop. If you begin by shorting 200 shares, any follow-up at lower
prices should be in smaller quantities and you should carefully limit
how far down in price you will continue to sell short.
Since you have to get an uptick from the previous trade before your
short-selling order is executed, orders should normally be entered either
at the market or with a limit of % point or so below the last price. A weak
stock could trade down a point or more without having an uptick.
You'll have to short in a margin account, and you had better check
with your broker first to see if you can borrow the stock you want to sell
short. Also, if the stock pays a dividend while you are short, you will
have to make good and pay the dividend to the person who bought the
stock you sold. (So don't short big dividend paying stocks.)
As a possible alternative you may want to consider buying put options;
at least you don't need an uptick to receive an executed trade. As men-
tioned, you can now buy puts on the S&P Market Index.
The whole matter of short selling is quite treacherous, even for pro-
fessionals, and only the more able, daring, and successful investors
should probably venture into this puzzling territory. One last absolute
warning: Don't short an advancing stock just because its price seems too
high to you. You could be "taken to the cleaners."
To summarize: Don't overdiversify. Concentrate on a small list of
well-selected stocks, and let the market help determine how long stocks
should be held. Using margins is okay if you are experienced, but it
involves extra risk.
12
Should You Buy Options,
OTC Stocks, New Issues...?
I do not think most investors should buy or sell options. Options are
very speculative and involve substantially greater risks and price volatili-
ty than do common stocks. Winning investors should first learn how to
minimize the investment risks they take, not increase them. After a per-
son has proven he or she is able to make money in common stocks and
has sufficient investment understanding and actual experience, then
the limited use of options might be intelligently considered.
Limit Your Dollar
Commitment to Options
When and if you do consider options, you should positively limit the
percentage of your total investable money committed to options; 10%
to 15% is a prudent limit.
Options are like making all or nothing bets. If you buy a three-month
call option on General Motors, that gives you the right to purchase 100
shares of General Motors at a certain price anytime over the next three
months; the option could expire worthless at the end of three months if
General Motors common stock does not perform as expected.
Short-Term Options Arc More
Risky
If you buy options, you are better off buying longer time period
options—six months, or so. This will minimize the chance your option

116
Be Smart from the Start
will run out of time before your stock has had a chance to perform.
Now that I've told you this, what do you think most investors do?
They buy shorter-term options, 30 days to 90 days, because these
options are cheaper and move faster in both directions, up and down!
The problem with short-term options is that you could be right on
your stock but the general market may slip into an intermediate correc-
tion, and all stocks will be down at the end of the short time period.
You will then lose on all your options because of the general market.
This is also a reason why you want to spread your option buying and
option expiration dates over several different months.
I also prefer buying options on the most aggressive and outstanding
stocks, ones where the premium you have to pay for the option is high-
er. Once again, you want options on the best stocks, not the cheapest.
You should also adopt some rule about where you intend to cut and
limit your losses. The percentage will naturally have to be more than
8% since options are much more volatile than stocks. If an option fluc-
tuates three times as rapidly as its underlying stock, then perhaps 20%
or 25% might be a possible absolute limit. On the profit side, you might
consider adopting a rule that you'll take many of your gains when they
hit 50% to 75%.
Keep Option Trading Simple
Keep option ucau.i.js ——-,_
Another intelligent rule is to always keep the investment problem as
simple as possible. Don't let someone talk you into getting fancy and
speculating in strips, straddles, and spreads.
A strip is a form of conventional option that couples one call and two
puts on the same security at the same exercise price with the same expi-
ration date. The premium is less than it would be if the option were
purchased separately.
A straddle is either long or short. A long straddle is a long call and a
long put on the same underlying security at the same exercise price and
with the same expiration month. A short straddle is a short call and a
short put on the same security at the same exercise price and with the
same expiration month.
A spread is a purchase and sale of options of the same class (class
refers to time).
It is difficult enough to just pick a stock or an option that is going up.
If you confuse the issue and start hedging (being both long and short at
the same time), you could, believe it or not, wind up losing on both sides.
Should You Buy Options, OTC Stocks, New Issues. . . ?
117
If you think a stock is going up and it is the right time to buy, buy it or
purchase a long-term option and put your order in at the market. If it's
time to sell, sell at the market. Option markets are usually thinner and
not as good as markets for a stock on the New York Stock Exchange. The
way orders on the options exchanges are executed is even different.
Most amateur option traders constantly place price limits on their
orders. Once they form the bad habit of placing limits, they are forever
changing their price restraints as prices edge away from their limits. It is
difficult to maintain sound judgment and perspective when you worry
about changing your limits by
 l/g, !4, and V-j points. In the end, you'll get
two or three executions after tremendous excess effort and frustration.
When you finally pick the big winner for the year, the one that will
triple in price, you'll lose out because you put in your order with a l/t-
point limit below the actual market price.
You never make big money in the stock market by eighths and quar-
ters. You could also lose your shirt when your security is in trouble and
you fail to sell and get out because you put a price limit on your sell
order. Your objective is to be right on the big moves, not on the minor
fluctuations.
The secret to making money in options doesn't have much to do with
options. You have to analyze and be right on the selection and timing of
the underlying stock. Therefore, you should apply your C-A-N S-L-I-M
formula and select the best possible stock at the best possible time. If
you do this and are right, the option will go up along with the stock,
except the option should move up much faster due to the leverage.
In a major bear market, you might consider buying put options on cer-
tain individual stocks or on the S&P index, along with se.lling short shares
of common stock. You don't have to get an uptick in the trading of the
stock when you buy put options. Sometimes the uptick rule for short-sell-
ing stocks listed on an exchange or the inability of your broker to borrow
stock may make selling short more difficult than buying a put.
It will generally not be wise to buy puts during a bull market. Why be
a fish trying to swim upstream? Put and call options are quoted daily in
most local newspapers, as well as Investor's Business Daily, which also
shows the volume for each option.
Should You Write Options?
Writing options is a completely different story from buying'Options. I
am not overly impressed with the strategy of writing options on stocks.

118
Be Smart from the Start
A person that writes a call option receives a small fee in return for giv-
ing someone else (the buyer) the right to "call" away and buy the stock
from the writer at a specified price, up to a certain date. In a bull mar-
ket, I would rather be a buyer of calls than a writer of calls. In bad mar-
kets, just stay out or go short.
The writer of calls pockets a small fee and is, in effect, locked in for
the time period of the call. What if the stock gets into trouble and
plummets? The small fee won't cover the loss. Of course, there are
maneuvers the writer can take, such as buying a put to hedge and cover
oneself, but then the problem gets too complicated and the writer
could get whipsawed back and forth.
What happens if the stock doubles? The writer gets the stock called
away, and for a scrubby fee loses all chance for a worthwhile profit. Why
take risks in stocks for only skimpy gains and no chance for large gains?
The reasoning I'm giving you is not the reasoning you will hear from
most investors or brokers. But then again, what most people are saying
and doing in the stock market isn't worth knowing, is it?
Writing naked calls is even more foolish, in my opinion. Naked writ-
ers receive a fee for writing a call on a stock they do not own, so they
are unprotected if the stock moves against them.
It is possible that large investors that have trouble making decent
returns on their portfolio may find some minor added value in writing,
on part of their investment position, short-term options in stocks that
they feel are overpriced. However, I am always somewhat skeptical of
new methods of making money that seem so easy. There are few free
lunches in the stock market.
Great Opportunities in
NASDAQ Stocks
NASDAQ stocks are not traded on a listed stock exchange but are trad-
ed through over-the-counter dealers. The over-the-counter market is a
specialized field, usually of younger, less-established companies.
There are hundreds of intriguing new growth stocks in the NASDAQ
market; however, you may want to learn to first make money buying and
selling outstanding listed stocks. After you have been in the listed mar-
ket and have a record of some success, then the exploration of the over-
the-counter stock market should positively be considered.
If you buy over-the-counter securities, they should possibly be limited
to no more than 25% to 50% of your total stock portfolio. For maxi-
mum flexibility and safety, it is vital to maintain marketability in all your
investments.
Should You Buy Options, OTC Stocks, New Issues. . . ?
119
Sometimes over-the-counter securities may prove to be less liquid in
very poor markets. In truly terrible markets, some over-the-counter
dealers may just stop making markets or be very slow to answer their
telephone when you want out.
There is a considerable amount of information available today on the
thousands of over-the-counter stocks. You can obtain charts that show
volume figures, as well as price movement and most of the other neces-
sary investment data. So don't overlook the NASDAQ market.
Many NASDAQ stocks are frequently available at lower P/E ratios
because they may not have received wide recognition and strong institu-
tional acceptance. In selecting over-the-counter stocks, you should
apply the C-A-N S-LT-M formula and steer clear of low-priced stocks ($5
and $10) that have no institutional sponsorship.
The over-the-counter market is a very large marketplace. There were
days in the 1990s when trading volume on the OTC market was larger
than that on the New York Stock Exchange. Value Line, Standard &
Poor's, Daily Graphs, Long Term Values, Quote Digest, and Mansfield all
provide services that trace OTC stocks.
In 1983 and again in 1993, more than 800 companies went public by
selling stock in their enterprises. Almost all of these youthful and inno-
vative organizations are traded in the NASDAQ market. Many of them
are definitely outstanding companies, more than have been seen in
generations, and many will emerge as leaders in future market cycles.
Winners on the American
Stock Exchange
The AMEX, as it is referred to, lists companies that are typically
younger or smaller in size than those on the NYSE. Trading on the
AMEX is therefore much more speculative and volatile.
However, for skillful investors who follow a sound plan of operation,
the American Exchange companies in certain market cycles may offer
tremendous possibilities. Following is a list of some of the unbelievable
price moves with all stock splits considered that occurred on the
American (curb) Exchange in the past.
Amrep Corporation—March 1968 to May 1969, $14 to $62
Bergen Brunswig—June 1980 to May 1983, $15 to $94
Champion Home Builders—February 1968 to May 1969, $28 to $152
Chilton Corporation—July 1982 to September 1983, $10 to $78
Commodore Int'l. Ltd.—June 1978 to July 1983, $22 to $1215

120
\
Be Smart from the Start
Community Psychiatric—March 1977 to April 1987, $11 to $590
Crown Crafts—June 1986 to September 1987, $13 to $120
Deltona Corp.—April 1968 to October 1969, $26 to $150
Dome Petroleum—November 1977 to February 1980, $40 to $296
Fairchild Camera—February 1959 to June 1960, $16 to $200
Falcon Seaboard Inc.—October 1974 to December 1977, $14 to $142
Flightsafety Int'l. Inc.—August 1977 to May 1981, $9 to $100
General Cinema Corp.—July 1967 to December 1968, $21 to $125
Gerber Scientific Inc.—March 1979 to November 1980, $18 to $116
Hasbro Inc.—July 1982 to September 1983, $22 to $95
Houston Oil & Mine—October 1972 to November 1973, $15 to $186
Key Pharmaceuticals—August 1980 to June 1983, $25 to $132
Kirby Exploration Co.—September 1979 to August 1981, $30 to $450
La Quinta Motor Inns—November 1977 to January 1982, $11 to $104
Levitz Furniture—September 1970 to May 1972, $47 to $348
National Video—March 1965 to April 1966, $58 to $240
Paddington Corp.—January 1962 to November 1961, $68 to $138
Pall Corporation—November 1977 to January 1981, $35 to $203
Parvin Dohrmann—April 1968 to May 1969, $27 to $140
Petrie Stores Corp.—September 1970 to January 1973, $30 to $120
Petro Lewis Corp.—November 1976 to February 1980, $13 to $150
Prentice-Hall Inc.—July 1958 to February 1961, $35 to $225
Pulte Home Corp.—June 1982 to June 1983, $18 to $152
Resorts International—March 1978 to September 1978, $24 to $205
Syntex Corp.—May 1963 to January 1964, $45 to $570
T.I E Communications—October 1982 to July 1983, $22 to $80
Topps Chewing Gum—June 1982 to June 1983, $7 to $45
Veeco Instruments Inc.—January 1978 to November 1980, $10 to $94
Wang Labs Inc., Class B—March 1978 to November 1980, $12 to $180
Wards Co. (now Circuit City)—November 1982 to July 1987, $14 to $360
Whitehall Corp.—August 1980 to June 1983, $11 to $132
There will be other eiant winners in the future.
Should You Buy Options, OTC Stocks, New Issues. . . ?
121
Should You Own Convertible
Bonds?
I do not recommend that the average investor buy convertible bonds.
Sometimes investors are attracted to this medium because they can bor-
row heavily and leverage their commitment. This simply increases your
risk. Excessive leverage can be dangerous.
The theory goes that a convertible bond will almost rise as fast as the
common stock rises, but the convertible bond will decline less during
downturns. As it goes with most theories, the reality may be quite differ-
ent. There is also a liquidity question to consider, since many convert-
ible bond markets may dry up in extremely difficult periods.
How about Tax-Free
Securities and Tax Shelters?
Should you consider tax-free securities and tax shelters? No, I don't
think the average investor should use these investment vehicles.
People seeking too many tax benefits frequently end up investing in
questionable or risky ventures. The investment decision should always
be considered first and tax considerations made a distant second.
This is particularly true in today's environment of a lower top tax
bracket. One of the greatest tax advantages during the early 1980s was
to make long-term capital gains at the lower capital gains tax rates.
Overconcern about taxes can seriously confuse and cloud your nor-
mally sound investment judgment. Common sense should also tell you
if you invest in tax shelters, there is a much greater chance the IRS may
decide to audit your tax return.
The tax-shelter game is a fertile field for potential scams and fraudu-
lent promotions. Time magazine on December 5, 1983, discussed the
charge of a federal grand jury in New York City that Sentinel Government
Securities and Sentinel Financial Instruments was the largest criminal tax
fraud in U.S. history. Hollywood leftist Norman Lear was apparently
taken for $1.8 million, according to the article.
This is America, where anyone who really works at it can be success-
ful. Learn how to make a net profit, and when you do, be happy about
it, rather than complaining about having to pay tax because you made a
profit. Would you rather have a loss so you have no tax to pay?
Recognize at the start that Uncle Sam is always your partner and he will
participate in his normal share of your wages and your investment gains.
I have never bought a tax-free security or a tax shelter. This has left
me free to concentrate on finding the best investments possible. On
occasion when these investments worked nut I nair) mv tavf>« on tVif»m

122
Be Smart from the Start
just like everybody else. The United States' system of freedom and
opportunity is the greatest in the world, so learn to use it.
Are Income Stocks
Recommended?
I do not believe most people should buy common stocks for dividends
or income. In theory, income stocks should be safer, but don't be lulled
into believing they can't decline sharply.
People think utility and bank stocks are conservative and that you can
just sit and hold them because you are getting your dividends. Ask any
investor about owning Continental Illinois Bank in 1984 when the stock
plunged from $25 to $2, or any of the electrical utilities caught up in
nuclear power plant problems. Electric utilities nosedived in 1994.
If you do buy income stocks, don't strain to buy the highest dividend
yield available. That will probably entail greater risk and lower quality.
Trying to get an extra 2% or 3% yield can expose your capital to larger
losses. Dividends can also be cut if they are not being adequately cov-
ered by a company's earnings per share.
If you need income, my advice is to buy the very best stocks you can
find and simply withdraw 6% or 7% of your investment each year for liv-
ing expenses. You could sell off a few shares and withdraw lV2% per
quarter. Higher rates of withdrawal are not generally advisable, since in
time they could lead to possible depletion of your principal.
Are Warrants Safe
Investments?
Most investors should shy away from low-priced warrants. It is another
complex specialized field that sounds fine in concept but which few
investors understand. Warrants give a person the right to buy so many
shares of a company's common stock at a specific price, up to a certain
date. Many warrants are cheap in price and, therefore, seem appealing.
The real question comes down to whether the common stock is correct
to buy. Most investors will be better off to forget the field of warrants.
Should You Buy New Stock
Issues?
Should the average individual investor buy new issues on the initial
offering? I don't generally recommend it. There are several reasons.
Should You Buy Options, OTC Stocks, New Issues. . . ?
123
First, the few outstanding new issues are going to be in such hot
demand by institutions that if you are able to buy them on the offering,
you may only be able to buy a tiny allotment. If you can acquire all the
stock you want, in many cases it may not be an outstanding issue.
Although most underwritings seem to be underpriced in the 1990s,
new underwritings can occasionally be overpriced, and since they have
no well-established market, you cannot be sure whether they are over-
priced or not. This speculative area should, in most cases, be left to
experienced institutional investors who can afford the necessary in-
depth research and who are able to spread their new issue risks among
many different equities.
Larger individual investors who can afford several expensive and var-
ied services may want to consider Value Line's New Issue Service.
However, many of the stock offerings being followed here that were ini-
tially filed with the SEC may not actually come public. The IPO
Reporter, a Florida-based service, also provides information on new
issues.
Once an initial public offering has been trading in the marketplace
for two or three months or more, you have additional valuable market
price and volume action data on which to judge the situation. Stocks
that have formed proper price bases should definitely be considered by
experienced investors who understand correct selection and timing
techniques. This can be a great source for new ideas.
There are always standout companies with superior new products and
excellent current earnings to be considered from among the broad list
of businesses that become publicly held in the previous three months to
three years. I.B.D.'s New America page covers many of them.
Even so, new issues can be more volatile and occasionally suffer mas-
sive corrections during difficult bear markets. This usually happens
after a period of wild craze in the new-issue market, where any and
every offering seems to be a "hot issue." For example, a new-issue boom
developed in the early 1960s and in the beginning of 1983.
Merger Candidates Can Be
Erratic
Should the individual investor speculate in merger candidates? No, not
normally. It is usually safer to buy sound companies, based on your C-A-N
S-L-I-M evaluation, than to try to guess whether or not a company will
be sold.
Some merger candidates run up substantially in price on rumors of a

124
Be Smart from the Start
deal falls through or other unforeseen circumstances occur. In other
words, it can be a risky, volatile business and in most instances should
be left to experienced professionals.
Should You Buy Foreign
Stocks?
How about foreign stocks? Don't they have terrific potential? Yes, a few
foreign stocks have great potential at the right time and the right place,
but I don't advise individual investors to waste much time investing in
foreign stocks. The potential profit should be two or three times as
large as that in a standout U.S. company to justify the additional risk of
owning a foreign stock. For example, the player in foreign securities
must understand and follow closely the general market of the particular
country involved. Sudden changes in the country's interest rates, cur-
rency, or governmental policy could, in one sweeping action, make your
investment considerably less attractive. There have also been such one-
sided moves as nationalization of companies by countries.
It is not really necessary for individuals to find foreign stocks when
there are over 8000 securities to select from in the United States.
Foreign stocks should probably be left to professionals who specialize in
this field. There are a few good mutual funds that excel in this specialty.
In 1982, some of our large banks learned the hard way the substantial
added risk they assumed when making loans and investments in foreign
countries.
Avoid Penny Stocks
The Canadian and Denver markets list many stocks you can buy for only
a few cents a share. The reason I suggest you avoid gambling in such
cheap merchandise is that everything sells for about what it's worth. You
get what you pay for.
These seemingly cheap securities are unduly speculative and low in
quality. The risk with them is higher than with better-quality, higher-
priced investments. The opportunity for questionable or unscrupulous
promotional practices is also greater. I do not like to buy any common
stock that sells below $10 or $12 a share. If you want to fly, why not go
first class?
Should You Buy Options, OTC Stocks, New Issues. . . ?
125
Do You Belong in Futures?
Should you speculate in commodities or other futures? Probably not.
Commodity futures are extremely volatile and much more speculative
than most common stocks are. It is not an arena for the inexperienced
or small investor unless you want to gamble or lose money quickly.
However, once an investor has four or five years' experience and has
unquestionably proven his or her ability to make money in common
stocks, the "strong of heart" might consider this medium.
In commodities it is even more important to be able to read and inter-
pret charts. The chart price patterns in commodity prices are similar to
those in individual stocks. Being aware of futures charts can also help stock
investors evaluate changing basic economic conditions in the country.
There are a relatively small number of futures in which you can trade.
Therefore, astute speculators can concentrate their analyses. The rules
and terminology of commodity trading are different and the risk is far
greater, so investors should definitely limit the proportion of invest-
ment funds which might be committed to futures. There are worrisome
events, such as limit down days, where a trader is not even allowed to
sell and cut a loss. Futures can be treacherous and devastating.
Most futures fall under the group categories of grains, precious met-
als, industrial metals, foods, meats, oils, woods and fibers, financial
issues, and stock indexes. The financial group includes government
securities such as T-bills and bonds, plus foreign currencies. One of the
more active stock indexes traded is the S&P 100.
Large commercial concerns, such as Hershey, use the commodity
market for "hedging." Hershey, for example, might lock in a current
price by temporarily purchasing cocoa beans in May for December
delivery, while arranging for a deal in the cash market.
Should You Buy Gold, Silver,
or Diamonds?
Should you invest in gold, silver, diamonds, or other precious metals or
stones? Some investors have lost a great deal of money investing in such
commodities.
Many of these items were once promoted in a superaggressive fashion
with little protection afforded the small investor. There was no SEC to
protect against exaggerated, or possibly fraudulent, claims made by
some dealers in precious metals. Many books were written boldly pre-

126
Be Smart from the Start
dieting gold would bolt to several thousand dollars and our country
would go down the drain.
Gold, silver, diamonds, and other items of this nature are commodi-
ties. In recent years, they became highly speculative commodities.
When the frenzy died down, many investors were left with investments
they had bought at inflated price levels.
The dealer's profit markup in these investments was excessive in
some cases. Furthermore, these investments did not pay interest or divi-
dends during a period of very high interest rates.
Gold, silver, and diamonds all made very major long-term tops in
1980. At some point these commodities will rally back to a degree.
However, due to the wild speculative furor that occurred, there is no way
to know how much time must pass to completely clean out past excesses.
There will be periodic short, quick runups in gold, caused by fears or
panics regarding potential problems in certain foreign countries. But,
this type of commodity trading can be a pretty emotional and unstable
game, so I suggest extreme care and caution.
The Soviet totalitarian economic system and that of most captive
satellite Iron Curtain countries have been dismal failures. The Soviet
Union's continued agricultural failures and vast spending for arma-
ments create recurring pressures for them to sell gold, oil, and other
assets to obtain badly needed currency and items their economy is
unable to successfully and efficiently produce. This does not add to
gold's appeal.
A certain amount of the past speculation in gold was fueled by the
Arab world during the inflationary period when the price of oil was
rapidly escalating. This situation has now changed somewhat. Because
of excessive oil prices in the 1970s and early 1980s, the long-term world
demand for oil slowed.
To prevent excessive dependence on imported oil from OPEC and
future costly inflationary binges, the United States could and should
press hard to open the deep interior of Alaska for oil drilling. I spent a
few years stationed in Alaska while in the Air Force and can say that only
a couple of thousand people a year visit this extremely remote area,
where the temperature falls to 70 degrees below zero in the winter. It
should be developed for the benefit of 250 million human beings.
Silver may find fewer uses as photography companies convert to discs
and films that no longer use silver.
Diamonds were hawked to the public with almost fraudulent sales
pitches, claiming diamonds are guaranteed to go up every year in price
because they had always gone up. People were erroneously told that the
diamond-market price is totally controlled and set by DeBeers.
Should You Buy Options, OTC Stocks, New Issues. . . ?
127
Many investors were surprised to learn, as prices collapsed during
1980, that the law of supply and demand also works for diamonds. New
sources of supply for diamonds also came into the world market.
As you can surmise, I do not normally recommend investing in metals
or precious stones. It is possible at some point that small investments in
such items will become timely and reasonable. However, even in this
case, investors still may have to contend with large price markups and a
lack of ready marketability. Marketability becomes a vital issue when you
decide to sell and have trouble finding a willing buyer.
Should You Invest in Real
Estate?
Should you invest in real estate? Yes, at the right time and in the right
place. In the past, a greater percentage of individual investors in real
estate have probably made money than have investors in stocks.
I am completely convinced that every able-bodied citizen should work
toward either owning a home, a savings account, or common stock.
Two-thirds of American families report they own their own homes.
The typical equity in a home in 1984 was $40,000. Even most insurance
companies have made more from their big real estate equity invest-
ments than they have from bond and stock investing. That is in part
because real estate has been easier for most people to understand.
Home ownership has always been a goal of Americans. Their ability to
obtain long-term borrowed money through mortgages and the like,
with only a small down payment as equity, has created the leverage nec-
essary for Americans to make large real estate investments possible.
Time and leverage have usually paid off. However, this has not always
been true. People can and do lose money in real estate if:
1. They buy in an area that is slowly deteriorating or is not growing.
2. They buy at inflated prices after several boom years and just before
severe economic setbacks in the economy or in the particular geo-
graphic area where they own real estate. This might occur if there
are major industry layoffs or the closing of an aircraft or steel plant
that is an important mainstay to a local area.
3. They get themselves personally overextended with real estate pay-
ments that are too high, and their source of income is reduced by
the loss of a job or an increase in rental vacancies, if they own rental
property.

128
Be Smart from the Start
4. They make a poor initial selection, the area deteriorates, or they're
hit by fires, floods, tornadoes, or earthquakes.
They say there are three golden rules to buying real estate—location,
location, and location!
If you live in the Sunbelt area, you'll have an advantage because that's
where much of the past and future growth in the United States has and
will occur.
Southern California, Arizona, Texas, Nevada, and Florida are the
fastest growing Sunbelt locations. California is already the largest state in
the union, with 33 million in population and good year-round weather.
Texas will one day be the second-largest state in population. Houston,
Dallas, Ft. Worth, San Antonio, and Austin are just a few of its dynamic
areas. Lots of land is available in this giant state, and the state govern-
ment doesn't overtax or overregulate. But be careful. Dallas is more of a
distribution and evolving technology center, and Houston is more
dependent on the oil industry. In early 1983, the unemployment rate in
Houston was higher than in Dallas due to softness in the oil industry.
Florida has been known for past real estate booms followed by occa-
sional busts when the speculative fever got too hot. Florida will contin-
ue to develop rapidly, and light industry should evolve.
Tourists and retired people alike will keep on finding their way to this
fabulous land. Tampa-St. Petersburg and the surrounding area is one of
the regions pensioners seem to prefer. Around the turn of the century,
sunny Florida will become the third-largest state in terms of U.S. popu-
lation, and New York will be the fourth largest.
Your own home is probably the first real estate investment you will
make. Location is key here also. However, timing and financing are now
becoming vital factors too.
If you have to pay an inflated price plus a 10% mortgage, you will be
up to your ears in payments. Your risk-reward ratio has to increase. If
you use creative financing that could force you to refinance in three to
five years, your risks materially increase because you don't know what
loan conditions may be like in the future.
There will be many other forms of imaginative financing. These
absolutely must be investigated very carefully because most of them
could force you, the buyer, to assume greater risks or payments down
the road.
Remember, it is definitely possible to lose money in real estate or to
lose your house if you can't under any and all future circumstances con-
tinually meet the payments. I would also shun the widely promoted,
starry-eyed, nothing-down craze.
Should You Buy Options, OTC Stocks, New Issues. . . ?
129
Real Estate Questions for You
to Ask
Within or around a particular city, which locations are best? Ask your-
self some questions. What are the better areas? Quality usually holds up
best in the long run.
In which direction is the city most likely to grow? Are you close to
good schools and shopping areas? How easy would this house be to
resell later? Does it have all the features other families would want?
How about the neighbors and the neighborhood? What do these peo-
ple do? Is the home overbuilt for the area? What have other houses in
the immediate vicinity sold for?
Where are the main traffic arteries or freeways, and do you have rea-
sonable access to them? How long will it take you to get to and from
work each day? Is a long trip worth the time, fatigue, and gas expense?
Then there are questions of a different type. Could there be any pos-
sible problems in the future, like a new freeway a half block away; new
assessments for streets, sewers or lights; or a worn plumbing or heating
system or roof that may have to be replaced? Is the foundation solid and
is the land the house is built on sound? Has the house passed all
required inspections? Are you in a high-risk area for fire, earthquakes,
or floods? Can you get insurance?
Then you come to the financing. What will your total monthly pay-
ments be? Can they escalate and if so, how much? Will you be able to
handle the increases? Are you sticking your neck out a little or a great
deal? What are all the hidden costs, taxes and insurance, "points"
charged to obtain a loan? How much total cash will you have to come
up with in addition to the down payment? Can you positively get a clear
title? Are there unreasonable prepayment penalties in the lender's
agreement? Where will you get the money to make a balloon payment if
one will be coming due?
Real estate can be an excellent investment if you take your time and
make sure you know exactly what you are doing. Two twin opportunities
that real estate offers are tax advantages (depreciation and tax deduc-
tion for interest on your home or on commercial or rental property and
expenses), and leverage (using other peoples' money).
However, leverage has killed more than one amateur real estate opera-
tor who greedily overexpanded, so beware of trying to use leverage to
acquire too many pieces of property. That's dangerous. You could be
building a house of cards diat will be blown down in the next healthy
recession. Don't get carried away; use your head! Also, tax laws can
change.

130
Be Smart from the Start
You should, furthermore, be careful of putting too large a down pay-
ment on property you buy because when you eventually sell, you may not
be able to get all your cash out. You will probably have to take back a
large amount of paper in the form of a second mortgage. And remem-
ber, second mortgages have no legal right to the property and are subject
to substantial discounts when you try to sell and convert them to cash.
I would also be a little less interested in investing in condominiums
because you will, in effect, own an apartment without much land.
Frequently, land appreciates more over the years than does the structure.
A friend of mine who was in charge of real estate investments for the
New York Life Insurance Company for 25 years had the following
advice: "In office buildings or apartments, location and economic fac-
tors that will affect the area in the future are key. Is the area dependent
on one industry? What is the unemployment rate? Is this the type of
facility or unit that is going to be in demand? If the demand is for $20
per square foot units and you build for $25, you'll have trouble. Or if
people are wanting three bedrooms and you build one-bedroom units,
you will get hurt." These factors, he feels, are more important than the
fact that a facility has a big-name tenant on the lease.
From a future supply-and-demand point of view, there is an interest-
ing angle to land: they aren't making any more of it.
13
How You Could
Make a Million
Owning Mutual Funds
Mutual funds are outstanding investment vehicles after you learn how
to utilize them correctly. Most people, however, do not have a solid
understanding or conviction about mutual funds.
The first absolutely essential point to understand is that the big money
in mutual funds is always made by sitting through several business cycles.
In other words, to reap large returns from funds, you have to have the
strong belief and patience to sit tight for 10 or 15 years or longer. It's
like real estate. You may not make anything if you buy and later become
impatient or shortsighted and sell out after only three or four years. It
simply takes time. Nervous Nellies are not good fund shareholders.
Investors in open-end investment companies, as mutual funds are
sometimes called, tend to buy the best-performing fund after it has had
a huge performance year. The next year or two will probably show slow-
er or poorer results followed by an inevitable economic recession. This
is usually enough to scare out those with less conviction or the "I want
to get rich quick" fund holders.
Sometimes shareholders will switch to another fund that someone
convinces them is much safer (usually at exactly the wrong time) or has
a "hotter" recent performance record. Switching breaks up your long-
range holding plan. I suppose you should switch if you have a really bad
fund or the wrong type, like an income or industry fund when you
should own a diversified growth fund, but too much switching quickly
destroys what must be a long-term commitment.
Bear markets can last from nine months to two years or more and if you
are going to be a successful long-pull investor in funds, you'll need to
acquire the courage and perspective to live through numerous discourag-

132
Be Smart from the Start
ing bear markets. Have the vision to build yourself a great long-term
growth program, and stick to it.
I have sold mutual funds, known many top fund portfolio managers,
provided research to hundreds of mutual funds, managed two mutual
funds myself, and started the New USA Mutual Fund in 1992. In 1966,
one of the funds was up over 10%, when the Dow was down 23% in a
bear market. The other fund set a performance record for diversified
growth funds of + 116% in the following year. A huge number of
stocks in its portfolio doubled. We had even planned that our goal at
the beginning of the year was to be the number one fund for the year.
The fund did not do as well the next year. We had size problems, as
assets under management in the fund and individual accounts
increased dramatically. We also owned too many thin, volatile holdings,
as we had just invented Datagraphs in January 1968 and, for the first
time, had information on microfilm of several thousand smaller compa-
nies no one had ever seen before.
Some people thought we were a "flash in the pan" with one lucky
year, but most were unaware that twice before, in 1963 and 1965, we
had also made 100% or more in many individual accounts.
In 1963, the lowest-performing individual account I managed was up
115%. It was a cash account. From its inception, the fund ranked in the
top 22% of all common stock funds until the day it was sold to another
investment organization. This is an important fact most media people
overlooked. An even more important point is that those original share-
holders who held onto their shares as they were merged into the new
company had a total increase of over 1,100%, which is the vital point
I'm trying to make. The super big gains from mutual funds come from
compounding over a span of years. Funds should be an investment for
as long as you live. Diamonds are supposed to be forever—well, so are
your mutual funds. So buy right and sit tight, period!
How to Become a
Millionaire the Easy Way
Here is what I regard as the ideal manner for a shrewd mutual fund
investor to plan and invest. Pick a diversified domestic growth fund that
performed in the top quartile of all mutual funds over the last three to
five years. It will probably have averaged an annual rate of return of about
20%. The fund should also have a better-than-average record in the latest
12 months when compared to other domestic growth stock funds.
Steer away from funds that concentrate in only one industry or one
area like energy, electronics, or gold. The investment company you pick
Hou You Could Make a Million Owning Mutual Funds
133
does not have to be in the top three or four in performance each year
to give you an excellent profit over 10 to 15 years.
The fund can be either a no-load, with no commission, or load, or
one where a sales commission is charged. If you buy a fund with a sales
charge, discounts are offered according to the amount you invest and
some funds have back-end loads which you may want to check. The
commission paid is substantially less than the mark-up you pay to buy
insurance, a new car, a suit of clothes, or your groceries. You can also
sign a letter of intent, which will allow a lower sales charge to apply to
any quantity purchase made over the following 13 months.
When you purchase a mutual fund, you are hiring professional man-
agement to make decisions for you in the stock market.
Most diversified funds should be treated differently from individual
stocks. A stock may decline and never come back in price. That's why
the loss-cutting policy is necessary.
However, a well-selected fund run by an established management
organization will, in time, almost always recover from the steep correc-
tions that naturally occur during numerous bear markets. This is
because mutual funds are broadly diversified and should participate in
each recovery cycle in the American economy.
Therefore, I believe an extraordinarily different strategy should be
employed with mutual funds. Each time you get into the thick of an
economic recession and the newspapers and TV tell you how terrible
things are, why not add to your fund when it is off 25% to 30% from its
peak price. It might even be a possible time to borrow a little money
and buy more shares. If you are patient, within two or three years the
shares should be up sharply in price.
Remember, you're going to hold through many economic cycles, so
why not be smart and add to your investment during each bear market?
You can also reinvest your dividends and capital gains distributions and
benefit from compounding over the years. When you buy your growth
mutual fund, you should make up your mind at the outset that you are
positively going to sit through the next three or four bear markets or
economic recessions. This will give you the maximum opportunity to
make really big money.
How about Income Funds?
If you need income, you may find it more advantageous not to buy an
income fund. Instead, you could select the best possible fund available
and set up a withdrawal plan equal to l!x>% per quarter or 6% or 7%
per year. Part of the withdrawal would come from dividend income

134
Be Smart from the Start
received and part from your capital, but the fund should generate
enough growth over the years to more than offset the withdrawal of cap-
ital, if it is limited to 6% or 7% per year.
There are many organizations, such as Fidelity, Thomson, AIM,
Scudder, Twentieth Century, Oppenheimer, Dreyfus, United Funds,
Vanguard Group, and IDS Mutual that offer a family of funds with var-
ied objectives and the right to switch to any other fund in the family at a
nominal transfer fee. These families could offer you the added flexibili-
ty of making prudent changes many years later. The mid- to small-cap
growth funds in a family are generally the better performing choices.
How Many Funds Should You
Own?
As time passes, you may discover a second fund you would also like to
begin accumulating in another long-term program. If so, do it. At the
end of 10 or 15 years, you might own a worthwhile amount of two or
even three funds, but there is no reason to diversify broadly, so don't
overdo it. Those rare individuals with multimilliori-dollar portfolios
could spread out in more funds which would allow them to place almost
unlimited sums into a more diverse group of funds. If this is done, some
attempt should be made to own different-style managers. For example,
money may be spread among one value-type growth fund, one aggres-
sive growth fund, one small cap fund, one global fund, and so on.
If you own a growth fund which, by definition, invests in more aggres-
sive growth stocks, it should go up more in bull-market years and fall off
more in price than the general market in some bear market years. This
is fairly common and in keeping with the nature of most growth portfo-
lios, so don't get alarmed and panic out at the wrong time. During the
poor periods, try to look ahead several years. Daylight follows darkness.
When Is the Best Time to Buy
a Fund?
Any time is the best time. You'll never know when the perfect time is
and waiting will usually result in your paying a higher price.
Should You Buy a Global or
International Fund?
Yes, these could be a sound investment and provide further diversifica-
tion, but I would definitely limit the percent of your total fund invest-
ment
Hou You Could Make a Million Owning Mutual Funds
135
investments. International funds can, after a period of good perfor-
mance, suffer several years of laggard poor performance.
The Size Problem of Large
Funds
Asset size is a problem with most funds. If a specific fund has billions of
dollars in assets, it will be less flexible in retreating from the market or
in acquiring meaningful positions in smaller, better-performing stocks.
Therefore, I would generally avoid most of the very largest mutual
funds. However, if you have a fund that has performed well for you over
the years and it has now grown large but still performs reasonably well,
maybe you should sit tight. Remember, the big money is always made
over the long haul.
Checking Management Fees
and Turnover Rates
Some investors try to evaluate the management fees and portfolio
turnover rate of a fund. In most cases this nit-picking is not necessary.
In my experience, some of the best-performing growth funds have
higher turnover rates. The Fidelity Magellan Fund, during its three
biggest performance years, averaged an annual turnover rate of over
350%. CGM Capital Development Fund, managed by Ken Heebner, had
a turnover rate of 272% and 226% in 1990 and 1991 respectively and
was the top-performing fund from 1989 to 1994. You can't be active and
on top of the market and do nothing. A good fund manager will sell
stocks when he or she is worried about the overall market or a specific
group, believes a stock is overvalued, or finds another, more attractive
stock to purchase. That's what you hire a professional to do. Also, insti-
tutional commission rates that funds pay are extremely low, only a few
cents per share of stocks bought or sold.
Are Monthly Investment Plans
for You?
I do not generally favor monthly investment plans, where an investor adds
$100 or so every month to a fund program. My reason is practical. Most
people do not stick with them religiously. Therefore, they delude them-
selves by thinking they are going to achieve substantive long-term goals
with such plans. If, on the other hand, you can have money automatically

136
Be Smart from the Start
If you can, it is best to evaluate your choices very carefully, then try to
make a larger initial purchase and have the courage to stay with it. I
also do not think people should make long-term investments in bond or
preferred funds. Common stocks perform better.
If you want to check performance records, most magazines produce
an annual survey that evaluates the performance of most of the funds.
Your stockbroker or library should have special fund performance rat-
ing services such as Arthur Weisenberger or the Lipper service.
Investor's Business Daily rates the prior 3-year record and shows the
year to date and the prior year's percentage change in asset value for all
mutual funds that are quoted daily in the newspaper. Additionally, sev-
eral times a week it carries an article on a different fund and its invest-
ment activities.
An open-end fund continually issues new shares when people want to buy
diem. Shares are normally redeemable at net asset value whenever present
holders wish to sell. This is die most prevalent form of mutual fund.
A closed-end fund issues a fixed number of shares. Generally, shares
are not redeemable at the option of a shareholder. Redemption takes
place through secondary market transactions. Most closed-end fund
shares are listed for trading on exchanges. There are ordinarily better
long-term opportunities found in open-end mutual fund investing than
in owning closed-end funds that are subject to the whims and discounts
below book value of the auction marketplace.
A few people successfully trade aggressive no-load growth funds on a
timing basis, using moving average lines. There are several services that
specialize in fund switching. This requires considerable experience, tim-
ing, skill, and emotional discipline. I do not advise the typical investor to
attempt to trade no-load funds, because mistakes would probably be
made in timing of buy and sell points. Get aboard for the long pull.
Finally, some individual or professional stock traders use growth stock
funds for their IRA or Keogh retirement plans.
Why Many People Lose
Money in
Top-Performing Funds
Believe it or not, half of the people invested in some of the best-per-
forming funds in the country may lose money. How can that happen?
Very few people buy during a bear market. They're afraid. Far more
people buy much later, during a bull market, when they feel much
more assured. Some of these people then sell out over the next year or
Hou You Could Make a Million Owning Mutual Funds
137
two when performance is slower or down. Why not buy and sit tight for
the rest of your life and make a big fortune?
The Five Dumbest Mistakes
Mutual Fund Investors Can
Make
1. Failing to sit tight for an absolute minimum of 10 to 15 years.
2. Worrying about a fund's management fee, turnover rate, or divi-
dends paid.
3. Being affected by news in the market when you're supposed to be
investing for the long pull.
4. Selling out during bad markets.
5. Being impatient and losing confidence too soon.
Here are some strategies from a few of the smartest and best mutual
fund portfolio managers in the business:
AIM Aggressive Growth Fund's Harry Hutzler and Jonathan Schoolar
emphasize companies with a small market capitalization of $200 to $300
million. They evenly divide assets among 200 or so holdings to avoid
having a bomb detonate in the portfolio if they had 4% or 5% in any
one stock. They like stocks posting accelerating and better than expect-
ed earnings and also prefer to see both sales and earnings growing vig-
orously. Earnings reports are "where the rubber hits the road." Hutzler
and Schoolar do not visit companies and will sell when earnings start
decelerating or come in below expectations. They stay glued to the
news wires for indications that earnings will be a lot higher or lower
than expected.
Donald Chiboucas of Thomson Opportunity Fund states that their
investment process is based on the theory of positive momentum-posi-
tive surprises, which asserts that a good company doing better than gen-
erally expected will experience a rise in its stock price. Conversely, a
company falling short of expectations will experience a drop in its stock
price. Thompson looks for signs both on a company level and an indus-
try level including capacity utilization rate. They break down every
industry and company to their bellwether indicators that will signal sur-
prises. They closely watch about 12 areas of a company's business.
Twentieth Century Ultra's forte is picking the very best growth stocks
and they too look for companies showing strong earnings and sales

138
Be Smart from the Start
growth. Their policy of remaining heavily invested at all times does,
however, create volatility.
Michael DiCarlo of John Hancock Special Equities says they start by
ranking each industry sector based on expected earnings per share
growth as well as current business conditions. Then, within roughly the
top five groups, he picks the companies with the best potential for price
appreciation using a bottom-up approach. Generally, DiCarlo looks for
companies with growing revenue and earnings of at least 25% per year,
preferring those that are able to do this consistently.
To summarize, the way to make a fortune in mutual funds is almost
always by your long-term sitting, not your thinking. If you purchase
$10,000 of a diversified domestic growth stock fund that is able to aver-
age about 15% a year over a period of many years, here is what could
occur, compliments of the magic of compounding and time:
First five years
Next five years
Next five years
Next five years
Next five years
Next five years
Next five years
$ 10,000 
goes to $ 20,000
$ 20,000 
goes to $ 40,000
$ 40,000 
goes to $ 80,000
$ 80,000 
goes to $160,000
$160,000 
goes to $320,000
$320,000 
goes to $640,000
$640,000 
goes to $1.28 million
Now suppose you also only added $2,000 each year to your program
and let it compound over the years and you also bought a little extra
during each bear market while the fund was temporarily down from its
peak 25%. What do you think you'd be worth?
Although there are no absolute guarantees in this world, and yes,
there are always taxes, the example above is somewhat close to what's
been happening with the better growth mutual funds over the last 50
years and the American Stock Market has been growing since 1790.
(See the chart on page xiv at the front of this book.) So, in my opinion,
faith and confidence in America's long-term future is a very shrewd and
intelligent position to take and stick with for as long as you live.
PART 3
Investing
like a
Professional

14
Models of the Greatest
Stock Market Winners—
1953-1993
Now that you've previewed C-A-N S-L-I-M and know when to sell and cut a
loss or nail down a profit, I should mention that a number of the models of
Greatest Stock Market Winners, 1953—1993 we actually recommended or
bought. Have you ever heard the saying "those who can, do, and those who
can't, either teach or write"? Well, we did the work, produced the results
and now, afterwards, have put it down in writing to, we hope, help you.
Tracing the Growth of a Small
Account
In 1961, all my classmates in the first PMD program chipped in $10 and
started the first PMD Fund with the grandiose total of $850. It was partly for
fun; each classmate had one beginning share worth $10 in the fund.
Marshall Wolf, then with National Newark & Essex Bank in Newark, New
Jersey, and later an executive vice president at Midlantic National Bank, had
the thankless job of Secretary-Treasurer, keeping the records, informing the
gang, and filing and paying taxes each year. I got the easy job of managing
the money.
It is an interesting account to study because it proves you can start very
small and still beat the game if you stick with sound methods and are
allowed plenty of time. The account on September 16, 1986, after prior
taxes were paid, was worth $51,653.34. The profit was over $50,000 and a
share was worth $518. That is nearly a fiftyfold gain in about 25 years. Here
are some of the actual buy-and-sell records to illustrate in vivid detail the
' 
'- ---—"*-'••"• ^-""-'1icrn««if"rl un to this point.
(
Models of the Greatest Stock Market Winners —
SHARES
5
7
18
29
24
25
10
10
5
6
5
20
3
3
30
30
10
30
5
5
10
10
10
30
10
15
15
15
25
14
8
25
25
22
25
15
10
15
15
15
15
15
50
STOCK
Bristol Myers
Bristol Myers
Brunswick
Certain-teed
Stan. Kollsman
Stan. Kollsman
Endevco Corp.
Lockheed
Lockheed
Lockheed
Crown Cork
Crown Cork 
*
Brunswick
Brunswick
Polaroid
Polaroid
Korvette
Korvette
Crown Cork
Lockheed
Xerox
Xerox
Homestake Mining
Homestake Mining
Polaroid
Korvette
Chrysler
Chrysler
RCA
RCA
Coastal States
Chrysler
Chrysler
Control Data
Intl. Minerals
Chrysler
Chrysler
Syntex
Syntex
Syntex
Control Data
RCA
RCA
RCA
Pan Am
DATE
BOUGHT
1/1/61
1/4/61
2/21/61
3/10/61
4/13/61
4/26/61
6/13/61
6/27/61
7/25/61
9/1/61
9/1/61
10/11/61
10/31/61
11/1/61
2/28/62
4/5/62
5/28/62
6/15/62
6/20/62
6/25/62
7/16/62
7/16/62
7/31/62
10/24/62
10/30/62
11/1/62
1/16/63
1/18/63
2/28/63
2/27/63
3/14/63
4/23/63
5/6/63
5/13/63
5/17/63
6/11/63
8/7/63
10/9/63
7/9/63
1/8/64
1/9/64
1/10/64
2/17/64
1953-1993
PRICE
PAID
647/8
67>4
533/4
42>/8
453/4
13
447/8
463/8
48Y2
108H
110
64^4
2063/4
209
41
52H
99K
41'4
1043/4
105 '4
59'/2
5834
105
217/8
59
6034
62'/2
65'4
31%
92H
93
44'/8
527/8
543/8
55%
89'4
114H
149i/8
69^
102.02
106.19
107.33
65.53
DATE
SOLD
2/21/61
2/21/61
3/10/61
4/13/61
6/27/61
6/27/61
5/25/61
8/29/61
10/2/61
10/24/61
11/1/61
2/21/61
3/30/62
4/13/62
5/22/62
6/2/62
7/12/62
7/24/62
7/24/62
7/19/62
9/28/62
1/15/63
2/28/63
3/14/63
4/16/63
5/13/63
5/15/63
6/10/63
6/10/63
9/23/63
9/23/63
10/22/63
7/17/63
2/11/64
2/11/64
2/11/64
3/9/64
PRICE
SOLD
783/4
78%
68
39-V4
45
433/8
17!/2
48!/4
IDS1/*
58'/8
54
180
477/8
54!4
97'4
39-54
127'/8
54'4
54'4
977/8
351/8
835/8
62
32!^
109'/8
495/8
547/8
6134
61
34
neJ/s
H6'/8
225
67!4
1055/8
1055/s
1055/8
68
141
GAIN
OR
LOSS
149.87
223.35
(104.30)
(82.66)
102.96
7.55
(100.52)
(223.49)
(191.68)
183.96
(50.48)
(81.02)
190.30
(87.66)
(101.86)
385.94
545.40
(111.02)
(8.46)
300.03
102.55
11.47
211.30
2975.71
(59.62)
53.98
(8.49)
(25.54)
123.29

Notice that while there were about 20 successful transactions through
1964, there were also 20 losing transactions. The average profit was
around 20% and the average loss, about 7%. If losses had not been cut
in Standard Kollsman, Brunswick, and a few others, later price drops
would have caused much larger losses. This small cash account concen-
trated i|i only one or two stocks at a time. Follow-up buys were generally
made if the security moved up in price.
The account made no progress in 1962, a bad market year, but was
already up 139% by June 6, 1963, before the first Syntex buy occurred.
By the end of 1963, the gain had swelled up to 474% on the original
$850 investment.
The 1964 year was a struggling, lackluster year with no real gain.
However, worthwhile profits were made in 1965, 1966, and 1967,
although nothing like 1963, which was certainly an extremely unusual
year. Since there simply is not room in this book to show 20 long, bor-
ing pages of stock transactions, let me mention the next 10 years
showed further progress, but there were net losses in 1969 and 1974.
Another period of interesting progress started in 1978 with the pur-
chase of Dome Petroleum. All decisions beginning with Dome are
shown on the following page.
A valuable lesson can be learned about why most stocks sooner or
later need to be sold. Dome Petroleum eventually declined below $2!
Note also that the account was worn out of Pic'N'Save on July 6, 1982,
at $15, but we bought it back at $18 and $19, even though it was at a
higher price, and made a large gain by doing so.
Another engaging example of the C-A-N S-L-I-M principles being
properly applied is the one of David Ryan, a research associate and win-
ner of the 1985, 1986, and 1987 U.S. Investing Championships. David
entered the stock division of the contest in January 1985 with his own
account in the market and won the national derby with a 161% increase
for the year. In 1986 he increased 160% and in 1987 was up another
118%.
Here are some of the characteristics of David Ryan's winning stocks at
the time he bought them:
1. Average annual earnings growth rate, 24%.
2. Median EPS percentage increase, current quarter, 34%.
142
\
Investing like a Professional
\
Models of the Greatest Stock Market Winners—1953-1993
143

144
Investing like a Professional
3. Average P/E, 15.
4. Average Relative Strength, 85.
5. Relative Strength line up an average of 6.5 months.
6. Median shares outstanding, 4.6 million.
7. Median average daily volume, 10,000 (not critical).
8. Median industry group strength, top 30%.
9. Average alpha, 1.78.
10. Average after-tax margin, 7.3% (not critical).
11. Median stock price, $24.
Another associate, Lee Freestone, participated in the U.S. Investing
Championship in 1991 when he was just 24 years old. Using the C-A-N
S-L-I-M techniques, he came in second for the year with a result of
279%. In 1992, he gained a 120% return and again came in second.
The U.S. Investing Championship is not some paper transaction derby.
Real money is used and actual transactions are made in the market.
Examples of Great Winners to
Guide You
A selected group of the greatest stock market winners are presented
here and on the following pages. They are models of the most success-
ful investments in the United States between 1953 and 1993. Study
them carefully, and refer to them often, because they are examples of
what you must look for and learn to spot in the future. The thin line
below prices is a relative strength line.
Models of the Greatest Stock Market Winners—1953-1993
145

146
Investing like a Professional
Models of the Greatest Stock Market Winners—1953-1993
147

148
Investing like a Professional
Models of the Greatest Stock Market Winners—1953-1993
149

150
Investing like a Professional
Models of the Greatest Stock Market Winners—1953-1993
151

152
Investing like a Professional
Models of the Greatest Stock Market Winners—1953-1993
153

134
Investing like a Professional
Models of the Greatest Stock Market Winners—1953-1993
155

156
Investing like a Professional
Models of the Greatest Stock Market Winners—1953-1993
157

158
Investing like a Professional
Models of the Greatest Stock Market Winners—1953-1993
159
Study these patterns. History will repeat itself. All models show the
stock's chart pattern just before the point where you want to take
action. For example, the first model in this series of charts, Lorillard,
broke out of its five-week sideways price base from $24 to $27 the very
next week in November. If you bought as it traded at $27, Lorillard
advanced to $98 or 250% in the following twenty months. You are see-
ing pictures of the most outstanding price accumulation patterns just
before enormous price moves began.

15
How to Read Charts
like an Expert
And Improve Your
Stock Selection and Timing
X-rays and brain scans are "pictures" doctors study to diagnose what is
actually occurring in a human being. EKGs and ultrasound echo waves
are recorded on graph paper or televisionlike terminals to show what is
happening to the human heart. Maps are plotted and set to scale to
help people tell exactly where they are and how to get where they want
to go. Seismic data is traced on charts to help geologists study which
structures or patterns seem most likely to contain oil. Economic indica-
tors are plotted on graphs to assist in their interpretation. The price-
and-volume history of a stock is recorded on graph paper to help deter-
mine if a stock is strong and healthy or if it is weak and behaving in an
abnormal fashion.
A doctor would be irresponsible not to use X-rays and EKGs, and
investors are foolish not to use and learn to interpret price patterns.
Chart books allow you to follow a huge number of different stocks in a
highly organized, time-saving way. You can subscribe to any one of the
many chart services and receive complete updates weekly. In them there
is just too much valuable information about what is realistically going
on that you can't easily get any other way. That's why doctors study X-
rays and EKGs and why knowledgeable professional investors study and
try to understand and interpret charts.
Charts record and represent pure facts on thousands of stocks. Prices
that actually occurred are a result of daily supply and demand hi the
How to Read Charts like an Expert and Improve Your Stock Selection and Timing 
161
largest auction marketplace in the world. Facts on markets are much
more reliable than 98% of the personal opinions and academic theories
circulating about the stock market today.
Milton and Rose Friedrnan, distinguished economists, devoted the
first 28 pages of their excellent best-selling book, Free to Choose, to the
power of the marketplace and the unique ability of prices to transmit
important and accurate information to decision makers.
Those investors who train themselves to properly decode price move-
ments have an enormous advantage over those who are either too lazy
or too ignorant to learn about such seemingly irrelevant hocus-pocus.
Reading charts is easy to learn if you will take a little time.
1 have seen many high-level investment professionals ultimately lose
their jobs because they didn't know very much about market action.
Learn to Use Historical
Precedents
History repeats itself in the stock market. Many price patterns and price
consolidation structures that stocks form are repeated over and over
again, just as geological formations recur.
Therefore, price patterns taken from successful stocks in the past few
years should definitely be used as models or precedents for future
selection of successful stocks. Attorneys and geologists rely heavily on
precedents; why shouldn't you do the same?
Our record book of Greatest Stock Market Winners was compiled to
provide historical patterns and important precedent data which could
be used by institutional investment professionals as models when
searching for successful stocks.
Chart patterns are simply areas of price correction and consolidation,
usually after an earlier price advance. The primary challenge in analyzing
price consolidation structures is to diagnose if the price and volume move-
ments are normal or, instead, signal significant weakness or distribution.
Major advances occur off sound price patterns and bases. Faulty base
structures and completely obvious patterns that everyone sees bring failure.
Price patterns are certainly not Ouija-board magic fakery. Fortunes are
made by those who take the time to learn how to properly interpret a
graph's market action. Professionals that scoff at, or do not believe in,
such important tools are openly confessing their total ignorance of the
use of modern highly sophisticated measurement and timing mechanisms.

162 
Investing like a Professional
Search for Cup-with-a-Handle
Price Patterns
One of the most fundamental chart-base price patterns looks like a cup
with a handle when the outline of a cup is viewed from the side. Cup
patterns last, in time duration, from 7 to as many as 65 weeks (most are
usually three to six months). The usual percentage correction from the
absolute peak to the low point of the price pattern varies from 12% or
15% to 33%.
Cup with handle: 3500% increase in 61 months
It is normal for growth stocks to create a cup pattern during interme-
diate general market declines and correct l1/^ to 2 times the market aver-
ages, sometimes up to 2l/z times. However, stock downturns exceeding
2l/z times the decline of the general market averages during bull markets
are usually too wide and loose and should be regarded with suspicion. As
discussed earlier, your best choices generally are stocks with base pat-
terns that deteriorate the least during an intermediate market decline.
A very few volatile leaders can plunge as much as 40% or 50% in a bull
market. Base patterns correcting over this amount while in bull markets
have a higher failure rate if they attempt to make new price highs and
resume their advance. The reason is that a downswing over 50% from a
peak to a low means the stock must increase 100% from its low to get
back to its old high. Many stocks making new price highs after such a
huge move may fail 5% to 15% beyond their breakout price.
Here is one glowing exception. Sea Containers descended about 50%
during a sharp intermediate decline in the 1975 bull market. It then
formed a perfectly shaped cup-with-handle price structure and proceed-
~"~ '<% in the next 101 weeks. I presented this stock, with
How to Read Charts like an Expert and Improve Your Stock Selection and Timing
163
its 54% annual-earnings growth rate and its latest quarterly earnings up
192%, along with several other equities to Fidelity Research & Manage-
ment in Boston during a monthly consulting meeting in early June 1975.
One of the portfolio managers became instantly interested in the stock
upon seeing such big numbers.
SEA CONTAINERS INC
Cup-with-handle price pattern: + 554% in 101 weeks
Coming out of a major bear market, some patterns that have de-
creased 50% to 60% or more can succeed. The percent decline is, in
these cases, a function of the severity of the bear market and the extent
of the stock's prior price runup.
The bottom part of a cup pattern should be rounded and give the
appearance of a "U" rather than a very narrow "V." This characteristic
allows the stock time to proceed through a needed natural correction
with two or three final little weak spells around the lows of the cup.
This scares out or wears out the remaining weak holders and takes
other speculators' attention away from the stock. A sounder foundation
of strong owners who are much less apt to sell during the next advance
is thereby forged.
Basic Characteristics of
Handle Areas
The forming of the handle area is usually more than one or two weeks in
duration and has a downward price drift or price shakeout (where the
price drops below a prior low point made a few weeks earlier) near the
end of its down-drifting movement. Extreme trading volume dry ups will
normally occur near the lows in the price pullback phase of the handle.

164
Investing like a Professional
Cups without handles have a somewhat higher failure rate, although
some stocks with smaller capitalizations do successfully advance without
forming a handle.
When handles do occur, they should form in the upper half of the
overall base structure, as measured from absolute peak to the low of the
cup. This should be above the stock's 200-day moving average price
line. Handles forming in the lower half of a base or completely below
the stock's 200-day line are weak, failure-prone price structures.
Demand up to that point has not been strong enough to enable the
stock to recover more than half of its prior decline.
Additionally, handles that consistently drift upwards along their price
lows have a higher probability of failing when they break out into new
highs. This wedging-upward characteristic along low points in the han-
dle does not allow the stock to undergo the needed correction or shake-
out after having advanced from the low of the base into the upper half
of the pattern. This high-risk characteristic tends to occur in either
third- or fourth-stage bases, laggard stock bases, or very active market
leaders that become too widely followed and obvious.
A price drop in a proper handle should be contained within 10% to
15% of its peak unless the stock forms a very large cup, as in the unusu-
al case of Sea Containers. Downturns in handles exceeding this percent-
age during bull markets look wide and erratic and are, in most cases,
improper, excessive, and risky.
Constructive Patterns Have
Tight Price Areas
There should also be some tight areas in price patterns of stocks under
accumulation. Tightness in this sense means small price variations from
high to low for the week, with several weeks' prices closing unchanged
or remarkably near to the previous week's close in price.
Find Pivot Points and Watch
"Volume % Change"
When a stock charges through an upside buy point, which Livermore
referred to as "the pivot point or line of least resistance," the day's vol-
ume should increase at least 50% above normal. It is not uncommon
for a new market leader to increase its daily volume 500% to 1000%
during a major breakout.
The winning individual investor can afford to wait and begin buying
at these precise pivot points. This is where the real move starts and all
the pvritincr action originates. Tf VOU trv to buv before this point, YOU
How to Read Charts like an Expert and Improve Your Stock Selection and Timing
165
will be premature and in many cases the stock will never get to its buy
point. If you buy more than 5% to 10% past the point, you are late.
Your object is never to buy at the cheapest price or near the low but
to begin buying at exactly the right time. This means you have to learn
to wait for a stock to move up and trade at your buy point before mak-
ing an initial commitment.
Pivot buy points are not necessarily at a stock's old high; many occur
5% to 10% below a stock's former high point. Sometimes you can get a
slight head start by drawing a down trendline across certain peak points
in the stock's price pattern and begin your purchase as the trendline is
broken. However, you have to be right in your chart and stock analysis
to get away with this.
How to Spot a
Saucer-with-Handle
Price Pattern
A saucer with a handle is a price pattern similar to the cup with a han-
dle except the "saucer" part tends to be longer and more shallow. If
using the name "cup with handle" or "saucer" sounds unusual, consider
that for years you have recognized and called certain constellations "the
big and little dipper."
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO
Saucer-with-handle price pattern
A strong price pattern of any type should always have a definite price
uptrend prior to the beginning of its base pattern. You should look for
a minimum of a 30% increase in price in the prior uptrend, together
with improving relative strength and a very substantial increase in vol-
ume at SOm*» nnint Hllt-inrr fV. o

166
Investing like a Professional
The General Electric chart on the previous page shows an example of
a saucer-with-handle price structure.
Recognizing a Double-Bottom
Price Pattern
A double-bottom price pattern looks like the letter "W." This pattern
does not occur as often as does the cup price structure. It is usually
important that the second bottom of the "W" touch the price level of
the first bottom or, as in most cases, undercut it by.one or two points,
thereby creating a shakeout.
Double bottoms may also have handles, although it is not always
essential. Depth and horizontal length are similar to that of the cup for-
mation. In theory, a double bottom may not be quite as powerful as a
proper cup with a handle, since to make the double bottom, the stock
had to twice fall back to its low point. See Texas Oil & Gas and Dome
Petroleum below for outstanding examples of double-bottom price pat-
terns found during 1977 and 1978. The buy points are 32 and 42.
Double-bottom price pattern
How to Read Charts like an Expert and Improve Your Stock Selection and Timing 
167
Definition of a Flat-Base Price
Structure
A flat base is another rewarding price structure. It is usually a second-
stage base that occurs after a stock has advanced off of a cup-with-han-
dle, saucer, or double-bottom pattern. The flat base moves straight side-
ways in a fairly tight price range for at least six or seven weeks and does
not correct more than 10% to 15%. Standard Oil of Ohio in May 1979
and SmithKline in March 1978 are good examples of a flat base. Pep
Boys in March of 1981 formed a longer flat base.
Flat base price patterns
High, Tight Flags Are Rare
A high, tight flag price pattern is rare and occurs no more than once or
twice a year. It begins by moving approximately 100% to 120% in a very
short period of time (four to eight weeks) and then corrects sideways,
usually in three, four, or five weeks, no more than 10% to 20%. It is the
strongest pattern but is certainly risky and very difficult to correctly rec-
ognize or interpret. Many stocks can skyrocket 200% or more off this
formation. (See E. L. Bruce, June 1958; Certain-teed, January 1961;
Syntex,July 1963; Rollinsjuly 1964.)
The E. L. Bruce pattern in the second quarter of 1958, at around $50,
provided a perfect precedent or model for the Certain-teed advance
which occurred in 1961, and Certain-teed in turn became a model for
Syntex in 1963. Just about everyone can be helped by studying models.
Even our pilots in wartime were trained by using silhouette models of
planes as a guide to recognizing various types of enemy aircraft.

168
Investing like a Professional
High, tight flag price pattern
Deciphering a Shakeout-Plus-
Three-Points Situation
If a stock drops below its low price while it is in a base-building period, the
stock can usually be bought when it recovers by three points back through
the broken low point. The three-point rule can be tricky to interpret and
is used only on stocks in approximately the $30 to $60 dollar price range.
How to Read Charts like an Expert and Improve Your Stock Selection and Timing 
169
What Is a Base on Top of
a Base?
During the latter stages of a bear market, in a few stocks a contrary con-
dition occurs that can result in aggressive new leaders in the market. I
call this slightly bewildering case a base on top of a base.
What happens is that a powerful stock breaks out of its base on the
upside but is unable to increase 20% to 25% because the general mar-
ket begins another leg down. The stock, therefore, builds a second
price-consolidation area just on top of its previous base while the gener-
al market keeps making new lows.
Base on top of a base
When the bearish phase in the overall market eventually ends, the
security will probably be one of the first to race into new high ground
and launch a tremendous advance. The stock is like a spring being
depressed and held down by the pressure of a heavy object. Once the
heavy object (a bear market decline) is removed, the spring is free to do
what it wanted to do all the time.
M/A-Com and Boeing were two of our best institutional buy recom-
mendations made just before we placed a full-page "bullish ad" in The
Wall Street Journal on March 29, 1978. Both had a base-on-top-of-a-for-
mer-base price structure. One advanced 180%, the other 950%.
Healthcare Compare is an example that occurred coming out of the
1990 bear market in November 1990. It bolted from 24 to 175.

170 
Investing like a Professional
Wide-and-Loosc Price
Structures are "Failure
Prone"
Another interesting price phenomenon is the one we label wide-and-
loose price structures. Patterns with this characteristic almost always fail,
although some of them may later tighten up their price structure and
finally make a large-scale advance.
New England Nuclear and Houston Oil & Minerals are two cases of
price structures eventually tightening up from previously wide, loose,
and erratic price movements. I use these two examples because I missed
both of them at the time. It is always wise to review big winners you
missed to try to find out why you didn't recognize them when they were
exactly right and ready to soar into outer space.
New England Nuclear formed a wide, loose, faulty price structure that
looked like a double bottom from points A, B, C, D, and E. (See page
171.) It declined approximately 40% from the beginning at point A to
point D. That was excessive. Note the additional clue provided by the
declining trend of its relative strength line throughout the false struc-
ture. Buying at point E was wrong. The handle was also short and not
drifting down or having a shakeout.
New England Nuclear formed a second base from point E to F to G.
However, if you tried to buy at point G, you were wrong again. It was
premature because the price structure was still wide and loose. From
point E to F was a prolonged period down with relative strength in a
steep decline. The rise straight up from the bottom at point F to its
bogus breakout point G was too fast and erratic, covering only three
months. Three months of improving relative strength versus the prior
seventeen months of decline in relative strength was not sufficient to
turn the previous poor trend into a positive one.
The stock then declined from G to H to form what appeared to be a
handle area for the possible cup formation from E to F to G. However,
if you bought at point I on the breakout attempt, the stock failed again.
The reason: the handle was too loose—it degenerated 20%. But after
failing this time, the stock at last tightened up its price structure from I
to J to K and 15 weeks later, at K, broke out of a very tight sound base
and advanced almost 200%. Note the stock's relative strength line from
point K back to point F. So you see, there really is such a thing as the
right and wrong time to buy a stock. But it's demanding.
How to Read Charts like an Expert and Improve Your Stock Selection and Timing
1/1
: t s »«!=ii«s:j?.s s ::m:;: st t t i t *
i s Z sassi;;;;;;;;;;::::::::::: s i i
Wide-and-loose price structure tightening into a constructive price formation

172
Investing like a Professional
Houston Oil & Minerals
Pattern Tightens Up
Houston Oil is an even more dramatic example of a wide-and-loose pat-
tern that later tightened up into a constructive price formation. (See
following page.) A to B to C was extremely wide, loose, and erratic. B to
C was straight up from the bottom without any pullback in price. C and
D were false attempts to break out of a faulty and improper structure,
and so was H. Afterwards, a tight nine-week base formed from H to I to
J. (Note the extreme volume dry up along the December 1975 lows.)
This structure was called to my attention by an alert stockbroker in
Hartford, Connecticut, but 1 had been so conditioned by the two prior
years of poor price structures and toppy earnings that my mind was slow
to change when the stock suddenly changed its behavior in only nine
weeks. I was also probably intimidated by the tremendous price increase
that occurred in Houston Oil in the earlier bull market during 1973.
Once again, this just proves that opinions are frequently wrong but mar-
kets seldom are.
It also points out a very important principle. It takes time for human
beings to change opinions that have built up for a substantial period. In
this instance the current quarterly earnings turning up 357% after
three down quarters didn't even change my incorrect bearish view of
the stock to a bullish one. The right buy point was in January 1976.
Detecting Faulty Price
Patterns and Base Structures
Unfortunately, there has not been any original or thorough research
done on price-pattern analysis in the last 50 years. In 1930 Richard
Schabacker, a financial editor of Forbes, wrote a book entitled Stock
Market Theory and Practice. In it, he discussed many patterns, such as
triangles, coils, and pennants. Our detailed model building and investi-
gations of price structure over the years have shown the patterns he dis-
cussed to be unreliable and risky. They probably worked in the latter
part of the "roaring 20s" when any and every old thing ran up in a wild,
climactic frenzy.
Our studies show that, with the exception of high, tight flags, which
are relatively rare, reliable base structures must have a minimum of six
to eight weeks of price consolidation. Most coils, triangles, and pen-
nants are simply weak foundations without sufficient time or price cor-
rection to become proper and safe bases.
John McGee and Robert D. Edwards wrote a book in 1948 called
r" ' ' ' *•--'••—'- "f vt^ri, Trawls The hook is fairly expensive and
How to Read Charts like an Expert and Improve Your Stock Selection and Timing 
173
Wide-and-loose price structure tightening into a constructive price formation
appears to have copied many of the same faulty patterns presented in
Schabacker's earlier book.
In 1962 William Jiler wrote an easy-to-read book, How Charts Can
Help You in the Stock Market, which explains many of the correct prin-
ciples behind technical analysis. However it, too, seems to have ronrin-

174
Investing like a Professional
ued the display and discussion of certain of these predepression era,
failure-prone price patterns.
Triple bottoms and head-and-shoulder bottoms are also structures
widely mentioned in several books on technical analysis. These we have
found to be weaker structures. A head-and-shoulders bottom may suc-
ceed in a few instances, but it has no strong prior uptrend, which is a
necessary element for most powerful market leaders.
While head-and-shoulder bottoms are not as sound as previous writers
have claimed, head-and-shoulder top price structures are one of the
more reliable price patterns signifying a top in a stock. But be careful—
with just a little knowledge of charts, you can misinterpret what is a cor-
rect head-and-shoulders top. Many professionals do not properly inter-
pret the price structure.
Head-and-shoulders top price pattern
A triple bottom is a looser, weaker, and less-attractive base pattern
than a double bottom because the stock corrects and falls back sharply
to its absolute low three different times rather than twice, as with a dou-
ble bottom, or one time, as in the strong cup with handle.
Look for Volume Dry Ups
Near Lows of a Price Pattern
Nearly all proper bases will show a dramatic volume dry up for one or
two weeks along the very low of the base pattern and in the low area of
the handle. This means that all of the selling has dried up and there is
no more stock coming into the marketplace. Healthy stocks under accu-
How to Read Charts like an Expert and Improve Your Stock Selection and Timing 
175
mulation almost always show this symptom. The combination of tight-
ness in prices (daily or weekly price closes being very near each other)
and dried-up volume is generally quite constructive.
How to Use Relative Strength
Correctly
Many fundamental security analysts think technical analysis means buy-
ing stocks with the strongest relative strength.
You do not buy stocks that show the highest relative price strength on
some list of best performers. You buy stocks that are performing rela-
tively stronger than the general market just as they are beginning to
emerge from a sound base-building period. The time to begin selling is
when the stock advances in price rapidly, is extended materially from its
base, and is showing extremely high relative strength.
Analysts have a great deal to leam if they believe all diat technical research
amounts to is the buying of high relative strength momentum stocks.
What Is Overhead Supply?
A critically important concept to learn in analyzing price movements is
the principle of overhead supply. It is really quite simple. If a stock
advances from $25 to $40, then declines back to $30, most of the people
who bought late in the upper $30s and at $40 will have a loss in the stock
unless they were quick to sell and cut their loss (which most people don't
do). Therefore, if the stock later increases in price back to the high $30s
or $40 area, all the investors that had losses can now get out even.
Human nature is pretty much the same most of the time. So it is nor-
mal that a number of these people will sell when they see a chance to
get their money back after having been down a significant amount.
Good chartists (a typically tiny group of investors) know how to rec-
ognize the price areas that represent heavy overhead supply. They will
never make the fatal mistake of buying a stock that has a large recent
amount of overhead supply. This is one type of serious mistake many
inexperienced fundamental analysts tend to make.
On the other hand, if a stock is able to fight its way through all its
overhead supply, it may be safer to buy even though the price is a little
higher because the stock proved itself to have sufficient demand to
absorb the concentrated supply zone. Of course, a stock that has just
broken out into new high ground for the first time has no overhead
supply to contend with, which adds to its appeal.

176
Investing like a Professional
Overhead supply
Excellent Opportunities in
Unfamiliar Newer Stocks
Alert winning investors should have a way to track every week all of the
new stock listings and new issues that have emerged on the scene dur-
ing the previous two or three years. This is important because some of
these newer and younger companies will be among the stupendous per-
formers of the next year or two. A newspaper's OTC section can possi-
bly help you stay on top of the myriad of new companies.
Commonly, some new issues move up a small amount and then
retreat to new price lows during a bear market. This creates a rather
unimpressive record. When the next bull market begins, some of these
forgotten newcomers will, unnoticed, sneak back up, form a base pat-
tern, and suddenly take off and double or triple in price.
Most investors miss these outstanding price moves because they occur
in new names that are largely unknown to the average market watcher.
Following Chart books each week can help you spot these unfamiliar,
newer companies. It also is essential for a chart service to follow a large
number of stocks so you don't miss a big new leader simply because the
stock didn't appear in the service.
Levitz Furniture, Rite Aid, and National Chemsearch in 1970, and
Toys R Us in 1978 are a few examples of the situation mentioned above.
How to Read Charts like an Expert and Improve Your Stock Selection and Timing
177
Successful, young hi-tech growth stocks tend to enjoy their fastest
earnings growth between their fifth and tenth years in business.
Big Volume Clues Are
Valuable
Big daily and weekly volume provides another extraordinarily valuable
tip-off to a trained chart reader looking for potentially large winners.
Fannie Mae in May 1988, Software Toolworks in September 1989, arid
Nordstrom are examples of outstanding stocks that flashed such a key
indication immediately before tremendous price increases.
Huge volume weeks with price advancing, followed by extreme vol-
ume dry ups in other weeks, illustrates a picture of maximum contrast
in volume levels. This is very constructive. Using a daily chart service in
conjunction with weekly basis graphs can frequently let you see unusual
volume activity that happened on only one particular day.
Analysis of volume, or the number of shares of stock being traded, is
a subject worth careful study. It can certainly help you recognize if a
stock is under accumulation or distribution. Once you acquire this skill,
you won't have to rely as much on the personal opinions of analysts and
experts. Big volume at major points is indispensable.
The big volume clue

178
Investing like a Professional
Volume is your best measure of supply and demand and institutional
sponsorship, two vital ingredients in successful stock analysis. Perhaps
you may want to consider getting a chart book and starting to learn how
to time your purchases correctly. It's simply too costly to continue mak-
ing buys at the wrong time, or worse, buying stocks that are not under
accumulation or have unsound price structures.
A Loud Warning to the Wise!
Let me offer one last bit of judicious guidance. If you are new to the
stock market or the strategies outlined in this book, or more impor-
tantly, you are reading this book for the first time near the begin-
ning or middle of a bear market, do not expect the presumed buy
patterns to work. Most will be defective.
The patterns can be too wide and loose, with third- and fourth-
stage bases; wedging or loose, sloppy handles; handles in the lower
half of the base structure; narrow "Vs" moving straight up from the
bottom of a base into new highs, without any handle area forming.
The patterns can show laggard stocks with puny relative strength
lines and price structures with too much adverse volume activity.
It isn't that bases, breakouts, or the method isn't working any
more, it's that the time and the stocks are simply wrong. The price
and volume patterns are phony, faulty, and unsound. The general
market isn't right. It is selling time. Even a skunk isn't going to make
a cent.
Be patient, keep doing your studying, and be 100% prepared. At
the least expected time when all the news seems terrible, winter will
ultimately pass and a great new, super bull market will suddenly
spring to life. The practical techniques and disciplines discussed
here should work for you for many, many future economic cycles.
The following graph from Daily Graphs by Daily Graphs Inc. illus-
trates what a cup-with-handle-pattern looks like on a daily chart.
179

16
How to Make Money
Reading the Daily
Financial News Pages
For years, institutional investors garnered all the valuable investment
information. However, today you can obtain an amazing amount of pro-
fessional financial data and background from a daily newspaper.
City newspapers generally show at least a minimum of stock price
tables in their business sections. National daily business newspapers do
not give advice or recommendations; however, they do provide general
economic news and an understanding of financial alternatives for seri-
ous investors and people desiring successful business careers.
Anyone who wants to achieve Financial independence and a secure
retirement income should consider reading the financial news pages. It
is a good way to regularly keep up with the action of your investments
and "red flag" those you are thinking about buying.
But do you know how to use all this special news data? You might
think so; however, there may be essential measurements you have
skipped over. The tables and graphs that follow are from Investor's
Business Daily, a national business newspaper I started in April 1984;
they will help explain how to read financial features data.
Business newspapers should be organized to save time for busy execu-
tives and investors. Most people first read the "News Digest" on the
front page. You can scan brief headlines in a flash and stay up to date
on the prime economic, business, and world news. Articles are digested
in short, two- or three-paragraph stories. Sometimes a graph of a 'just
released" economic indicator, such as housing starts, Gross National
Product, retail sales, auto sales, or unemployment, is also shown.
Busy readers usually next glance at the feature stories appearing on
How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial News Pages
181
the right-hand side of the front page to see if one of the four top-level
national issue, Leaders and Success, News For You, or Investor's Corner
articles strikes their fancy. To further save you time, all front page fea-
ture stories are limited in length and completed on the very next page.
Page 4 is usually the Executive Update section. Frequently you'll find arti-
cles here on the latest high-tech and computer systems. The New America
page that follows is an absolute must-read for all investors. Every day there
are 3 to 4 stories on fast-growing, entrepreneurial companies. If you read
this each day, in 3 months' time, you will know about most of the exciting
new companies in America. Many may be tomorrow's big winners.
Next, many investors read the daily stock market column. It tells the
important "goings on" in the market the day before highlighting stocks
that displayed unusual action.
You can proceed from page 1 to 2 to 3 (front to back), rather than
jumping all around or starting toward the rear of the paper, to check
the stock tables. New York Stock Exchange prices are printed up front
in Section I because this is a focal point people want to check quickly.
Virtually all U.S. newspapers use the Associated Press price tables in
their papers. There has been little change in this basic information pro-
vided to the public for 50 years or more. For example, they show the
yield, P/E, high, low, closing price, net price change for the day, and
volume of trading for several thousand stocks. This is the standard data
most investors see, but it does not give you the complete picture.
Specifically, four critical additional news items are provided every day
in the Investor's Business Daily New York Stock Exchange, AMEX, and
NASDAQ tables, items that cannot be found in your local paper or in
The Wall Street Journal.
Earning per Share Rank
Indicates a Company's
Relative Earnings Growth
The first "additional" news item in Investor's Business Daily is the earnings
per share (EPS) rank, which calculates every company's growth in earn-
ings per share over the last five years and the stability of that growth. A
company's percentage change in earnings per share for the two most
recent quarters, versus the same quarters a year ago, is combined and
then averaged with its five years' earnings growth record. The result is
compared with all other common stocks in the price tables and ranked on
a scale from 1 to 99, with 99 being the highest. An 80 EPS rank means that
particular company's bottom-line earnings results are in the top 20% of
the more than 7000 corporations being measured.

182
Investing like a Professional
This, of course, could be crucial intelligence because it gives an
objective, relative measurement of the actual earnings results produced
by all of the leading corporations in American industry.
You can now compare the audited earnings record of one company
to that of companies in other industries or you can compare IBM's past
record to Digital Equipment, Hewlett Packard, Unisys, and all the com-
puter and computer-related companies that make up the industry.
Since earning power and earnings growth are the most basic measures
of a firm's success, EPS rank should be invaluable for screening the
true leaders from the poorly managed, deficient, and lackluster lag-
gards in today's emerging age of tougher worldwide competition.
EPS rank may be more meaningful than the widely followed Fortune
500 ratings that primarily list which corporations are the largest in size.
Corporate size rarely guarantees growth, innovation, profitability, or
an increasing number of jobs for workers.
Earnings estimates are not used in the calculation because they are
opinions and are sometimes inaccurate, whereas reported earnings are
actual reported facts.
How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial News Pages 
183
Relative Strength Rank
Shows How a Stock's Price
Has Performed
The second pertinent "extra" measurement is a stock's relative price per-
formance during the latest 12 months. Relative strength measures the
cold, realistic auction marketplace's appraisal of a stock, in spite of the
theoretical value of the company or its past popularity, name, and image.
How did the stock's price behave in the market in the last year? Its
running 12 months' performance is updated daily, compared to all
other stocks, and then placed on the same easy-to-use 1 to 99 scale.
An 80 relative strength rank means the stock, pricewise, outper-
formed 80% of all other common stocks in the last year. During good
markets, the potential implication of these two basic news measure-
ments, EPS rank and relative strength rank, is considerable. During
poor markets, relative strength measures that break below 70 might
forewarn you of possible problem situations. Every stock's group
strength is shown each Monday. Investor's Business Daily shows a list at
the end of the NYSE tables of stocks that just fell below 70, 50, or 30 in
relative price strength. These are generally companies to avoid.
Most of the superior stocks available for investment will usually rank
80 or higher on both EPS and Relative Strength. Since one is a funda-
mental measurement and the other is a marketplace valuation, insisting
on both numbers being strong should, in positive markets, improve
your selection process compared to the old, unscientific methods of
faulty opinions, academic theories, stories, promotions, tips, and touts.
Of course, there is rio guarantee that a company's terrific past or cur-
rent record can't suddenly start to turn sour. That's why you should
always have and use some type of loss-cutting strategy. Additionally,
you'll need to do a little more research, such as checking the stock's
daily or weekly chart to see if it is currently in a base (sideways area of
price consolidation) or is extended in price above its base. Then study
an S&P stock report tear sheet or a Value Line report to learn more
about the company's basic business and new products.
As discussed earlier, models of more than 500 of the best-performing
companies, over a 40-year period, showed that the previous five years'
earnings growth rate and percent increase of the latest two quarters'
earnings was the most important fundamental common characteristic in
the majority of excellent-performing companies. These successful mod-
els racked up an average relative strength number of 87 at the starting
point, when they broke out of their first price-consolidation basing
area, prior to their substantial price advance.

184
Investing like a Professional
Why should you invest your hard-earned dollars in a sluggish stock
that trumpets a 30 EPS rank and 40 relative price-strength rank when
there are dozens of first-rate choices with higher rankings? Companies
with poor ratings can perform, but there are more disappointments in
these lower categories. Also, even when a low-ranked company has a
decent price move, one of the better-ranked stocks in the same industry
probably advanced percentagewise much more. These combined mea-
surements, in a way, are similar to the A.C. Neilson's TV viewer ratings
of programs. Who wants to continue sponsoring a TV show that has
especially poor ratings?
For a minute pretend you are the New York Mets' manager. Visualize
it is "off season" and you are going to pick new players for next year's
baseball team. Would you trade for, recruit, or sign only .200 hitters, or
would you select as many .300 hitters as possible? The .200 hitters are
available at a cheaper price, but how many ball games would you win
with nine players in your lineup averaging .200?
When the bases are loaded in the ninth inning and the score is tied,
who would you rather march to the plate: a .200 hitter or a .300 hitter?
How often does an established .200 hitter blossom into a batting cham-
pion? Not often.
It's no different selecting arid managing your portfolio of stocks. To
be a more consistent winner and finish in the first division ahead of the
others, you need a roster of the very best players available—the ones
sporting a proven record of excellence.
With all the past talk about America's lack of competitiveness in many
areas of our older basic industries, these practical, no-nonsense mea-
surements have helped wake up corporate boards of directors. They
have created pressure for changes in top managements that are contin-
ually producing pathetic second division results. Alert, responsible
directors need to be aware of these longer-term company relative per-
formance rankings.
Accumulation/Distribution
This proprietary measurement is based on price and volume change
and tells you if your stock is under accumulation (professional buying)
or distribution (professional selling). You'll probably want to pick "A"
or "B" ranked companies and temporarily avoid the "D" and "E" ranked
ones. They are under liquidation in the last 3 months.
How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial News Pages
185
Volume % Change Tracks Big
Money Flow
The fourth valuable news measurement is volume % change. Most news-
papers only publish a stock's trading volume for the day, but volume %
change goes one giant revealing step further by keeping track of what
the normal trading level for every company is during the prior three
months. Stocks, like people, are different. One stock may average trad-
ing 10,000 shares a day, another 100,000 shares a day, and still another
1 million shares a day.
If a 10,000-share trader suddenly transacts 70,000 today, and its price
jumps one point, the stock has popped up on a 600% increase in vol-
ume. The volume % change column will show a + 600. It's like having
a "computer in your pocket to carefully monitor changing supply and
demand for every stock."
Is this essential data for you to know? Imagine if your largest stock
holding was down two points yesterday and the volume % change col-
umn showed your stock traded 500% greater volume than normal.
Wouldn't you want to be aware of that fact?
The columns displaying the volume % change for thousands of stocks
every day are one of the top reasons many specialists on the floor of the
New York Stock Exchange and most professional portfolio managers, as
well as many savvy public investors, read the Investor's Business Daily
stock tables.
This data allows them to scrutinize the flow of money into and out of
stocks. Many sophisticated investors and experienced or larger-producing
stockbrokers also widely utilize this more advanced news dissemination.
Money managers usually save time reading the tables because all
stocks up one point or more or those hitting new price highs are print-
ed in large boldface type. Stocks down one point or more or making
new price lows are underlined. You can scan the tables rapidly and be
aware of all of the key market action for the day.
To further save readers time in today's fast-paced business world, the
remaining print is easy to read, companies are spelled out more com-
pletely, and preferred stocks are displayed in a separate area.
Have you ever tried to find a common stock in the price tables and
found there were six or seven issues all with the same or similar name,
and you weren't sure which one was your stock? Old tables that show a
company with seven preferred stock issues alongside the common stock
can add to the delay and confusion in locating your common stocks.

186
Investing like a Professional
Additionally, each Tuesday the stock tables show every company's
P.E. ratio and Wednesday's tables give you the sponsorship rank.
Thursday's tables contain the % of stock outstanding that is owned by
management, and Friday's edition tells you the % dividend yield.
Rather than showing only the P.E. and yield every day, since they sel-
dom change that much and are not really the most vital data, IBD shows
today's more knowledgeable investor seven other key items as well that,
when taken together, are far more important for getting better invest-
ment results.
Be Alert to Stocks with the
Greatest % Change in Volume
All newspapers show the 15 most active stocks, usually consisting of secu-
rities like IBM, AT&T, or General Motors, which each normally trade
more than a million shares a day. Investor's Business Daily, on the other
hand, shows a table of the "Common Stocks with the Greatest % Rise in
Volume." This spotlights companies that have the largest increase above
their own last 50 days of average daily trading volume.
The list is valuable because the computer surveillance picks up the
small- and medium-sized, innovative, entrepreneurial organizations that
may have a 500% increase in trading volume but never reach a total vol-
ume figure large enough to make the more commonly followed "Most
Active" lists. These sophisticated screens may not appear in other publi-
cations. Pay close attention to the boldfaced stocks on the list.
Some newspapers list the stocks that are up most, percentagewise, in
price. This list is almost universally worthless because it will show a $2
stock up /s of a point as stock up in price the greatest percent. They
also show preferred stocks in the list. Low-priced stocks and preferred
issues are of little use to most informed investors. You can't get rich
prospecting in the junk pile.
Eliminating the cheaper, less relevant, low-quality stocks, plus the
preferred issues, and concentrating on a meaningful list of 25 of the
more significant securities $12 or higher is more useful. Stocks in this
list that have options listed show a small "o" after the company's name
to assist option traders.
Most newspapers typically provide a small block, "How to Read the
Daily Stock Tables." Be absolutely sure to read these instructions as you
would directions to any new product you buy. You'll learn many helpful
facts that will save you money.
How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial News Pages
187
Option Tables Should Show
Trading Volume
Stock option tables should give volume of trading for each option and
combine all exchanges together in an alphabetical list. Many daily publica-
tions omit volume data. Volume helps measure liquidity and the amount
of demand for an option. A long-term options table is also shown.
Always Check Stocks Making
New Highs Daily (Graphically
Displayed)
Another helpful feature is 30 graphic displays shown every day of stocks
in the news on each of the New York and NASDAQ markets. If a stock
makes a new price high for the year, a weekly graph of its high, low,
closing price, and volume is shown covering the past 12 months. If
more than 30 stocks make new highs, the ones with the highest EPS
rank are pictured. If there are less than 30, the remainder of the list is
completed with equities that had the greatest % change in their own
trading volume.
This display is like a computerized tool for bringing to the surface all
unusual day-by-day action so you will have a better chance to see all
potentially emerging leaders. It does not miss many leaders; however,
not all stocks shown will be successful and work out.
You would probably overlook most of these fascinating companies,
particularly in the over-the-counter market, because the stocks are not
widely known. These unrecognized, unfamiliar companies frequently
blast off and become the new outstanding big winners of the year.

188
Investing like a Professional
NASDAQ Stocks In The News
Each of these minigraphs of "Stocks in the News" are fact-packed with
fundamental decision-making data such as: number of shares outstand-
ing, EPS rank, company description, stock symbol, annual earnings
growth rate, accumulation/distribution, % owned by management, per-
cent company debt, group relative strength, stock relative strength line
and number, average daily trading volume, price-earnings ratio, current
quarterly earnings, high and low prices for the prior two years and if
the stock has options.
In June of 1986, I picked a June 1985 paper at random and checked
all 30 graphic displays shown in the June 1985 "OTC Stocks in the
News" section. In the one year up to June 1986, 27 of the 30 had
advanced in price and three had declined. In this instance the overall
increase of all 30 stocks averaged 75%, while the general market aver-
ages for the same time period increased 25%. That certainly doesn't
mean it will happen in the future, but at least in that strong bull market
year, the method seemed to work better than did throwing darts at the
stock tables. These graphs also picked up all of the real leaders.
How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial News Pages
189
Lists are provided for all NYSE, AMEX, and OTC stocks hitting new
price highs or new lows. Initial new highs could be worth checking up
on, especially in the OTC market, since few publications provide new
high lists for over-the-counter securities. New high lists are uniquely
shown by industry groups and they show the stock symbol and closing
price for each stock. The symbol lets you quickly check on new ideas.
If You Want Success, Study
The General Market
Indicators Page
If you sincerely want to do well investing in the stock market or be more
accurate in predicting what the American economy is likely to do, then
you must be able to correctly interpret the direction of the daily general
market averages.
To do this properly, you can't just look at one market average.
Investor's Business Daily provides you with the Dow Jones 30 Industri-
als, two broader indexes, the S&P 500 index arid Investor's Business
Daily stock index, which covers 6000 New York Stock Exchange,
American, and over-the-counter common stocks, and is the broadest
possible market-value-weighted index of the equities market.
The NYSE daily advance-decline line, which measures cumulatively the
number of stocks on the New York Stock Exchange advancing in price
versus the number declining, plus a 200-day moving average price line
for each market index, rounds out the measurements that you will need.
On the next page is a striking case in point of the importance of dis-
playing several large, easy-to-read graphs of different market indexes
together and paralleling exactly the same current nine-month period.
At most major market tops and bottoms, subtle divergences occur
between the various market averages.
As mentioned in Chapter 7 on general market direction, in
December 1984 and early January 1985, the Dow Jones 30 Industrials
made new lows, while the NYSE advance-decline line actually moved up
and penetrated into higher ground three times. This was a clear "blink-
ing light" alert that the broad market was getting stronger, while the
weakness in the Dow Jones 30 Industrials was providing a totally false
indication of the market's condition.
This divergence occurred right after discount-rate cuts on November
21 and December 21 of 1984. These interest-rate changes were shown
on the same stock index chart that displays the advance-decline line. A
stunning rally quickly ensued.

190
Investing like a Professional
How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial News Pages
191
At other strategic turning points, the Dow Industrials may break
below one of its important earlier price support zones and the Investor's
Business Daily stock index, which represents the entire market, may
hold above its previous lows established during the same period—there-
by flashing a positive sign. These are refinements you need to recognize
on a day-to-day basis.
Scanning this data once a week is not enough, because these signals
occur on one specific day, and it's important to spot them when they
happen. Do you think good piano players get that way by practicing
only once a week?
Psychological Market
Indicators Are Important
Items such as the percentage of investment advisory services that are
bearish or bullish, odd-lot short sales as a percentage of total odd-lot
sales (the higher the percentage of short selling by small investors, the
more positive it should be for the stock market), and cash positions of
mutual funds are some of the more important psychological measure-
ment tools that can be viewed along with the several market averages.
Key Market Sector Graphs
Let You Hone In
Nine different major market sector graphs appear daily at the bottom of
the general market indicators' page. The economy is divided into broad
economic sectors. You can rapidly monitor every significant sector such
as high-tech, junior growth stocks, consumer companies, health care
securities, and even a new issue index.
The percentage change in each index is quoted every day in a small
market sector box so you can separate the best-performing sectors of
the market from the below-par areas. The New York Stock Exchange
composite, the Dow Jones Transportation, arid the utilities index are
also shown in this box each day.
Over-the-counter and American Stock Exchange indexes are graphi-
cally provided on the OTC and AMEX price table pages, along with a
special OTC/AMEX market column devoted to reporting on this entic-
ing world of emerging growth opportunities.

192
Investing like a Professional
How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial News Pages
193
During early 1994, using data in the market sector box, you could easi-
ly see that the high-tech sector was the leading market segment perfor-
mancewise, with junior growth stocks next in strength, and the utility
index seriously underperforming the market averages.
Observe Prices of 197
Industry Groups Daily
Newspapers generally show stock tables containing the prices of individ-
ual stocks. But it is also possible to see the price changes every market
day for 197 industries.
On Monday, an alphabetical listing of groups highlights the prior
week's price performance of each industry. The top 10 industries are
shown in boldface print.
Every Tuesday the industry indexes are listed in order of those that
produced the best price performance since the beginning of the year.
This unique table varies its format to give you several points of view on
each industry's performance and ranking.

194
Investing like a Professional
Review Companies in a
Leading Industry
Each day beneath the industry price table, a price-and-volume graph is
presented of a top industry in the market. Under that is a list of the
companies within that particular industry group. Many people find this
screen worthwhile, so they cut it out to save for future research refer-
ence. The typical Investor's Business Daily is kept 13 days.
The number of companies in a leading industry can be extensive
since the newspaper has exclusive contractual access to a proprietary
historical database covering more than 8000 securities. Each industry
list is arranged in order of companies with the highest EPS rank and
relative-strength rank. Generally the top 20% of this list represent the
stocks with a superior past record within their particular industry.
How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial News Pages
195
Companies In A Leading Industry
The Medical-Hlth Maint Org group ranked In lop 30 prior six months
15 stocks are shown by total ol EPS Rank and Relative Price Strength
o after symbol means OTC; a means Amex; * Calculated annually
The Economy Page
Heads Up Second Section
The entire front page of the second section is devoted to coverage of
the U.S. and the world economy. Breaking news, as well as a regular
economics column entitled "Perspective," is provided daily.
Key Futures Graphs for
Traders and for Economic
Perspective
Twenty-four important futures are selected to present each day in graphic
form. This is helpful not only to commodity traders but to corporate offi-
cials and students of the economy, because, for instance, the price of
crude oil may influence inflation rates, as well as the price of airline
stocks; lumber prices give a hint of the building industry's health.
Today's savvy business people are interested in currency futures as well as
in corn, cattle, and coffee prices. Spot (cash) and future price tables are
also furnished for a wide variety of commodities. A special daily futures
column is provided and all charts show stochastic price momentum lines.

196
Investing like a Professional
Futures charts with stochastic lines
Check Up Versus Down
Corporate
Earnings Reports Daily
When corporations announce their quarterly earnings results, the reports
are separated into those which increased earnings and those where earn-
ings decreased. Additionally, the quarter's percentage change in earnings is
shown. You may be interested in the company's stock, so the stock symbol
closing price, EPS and Relative Strength rank, plus industry group is provid-
ed. A list of Best Ups and Worst Downs is also provided.
How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial News Pages
197
Latest up-and-down corporate earnings reports
Smart Mutual Fund Price
Tables that Tell Past
Performance
Many prudent investors buy mutual funds. These unique tables may help
you make sounder evaluations, because they show each fund's year-to-date
total return plus the prior three years ranking of total results. Investor's
Business Daily was the first newspaper to show performance data in its
mutual fund tables. Six different graphs are also shown each day of out-
standing funds and their most recent publicly available stock buys. The
10% which gained the most for the day are boldfaced in the tables.

198
Investing like a Professional
Smart mutual fund price tables
Last, a growth-fund index is graphically presented together with 50-
and 200-day moving average price lines. The index can be used as
another general market indicator, since it is made up of the combined
performance of twenty growth funds, or a tool for those who use mov-
ing average lines to trade no-load funds on a timing basis.
Performance of World Stock
Markets Are Charted
Of course for some people, investing is a global affair, so daily world-
markets graphs portray how stock markets in 12 other countries are
doing. Prices of selected foreign stocks are also listed.
New Issues, Corporate
Offerings, and New Listings
Pending new corporate underwriting and other financing are listed
showing you the dollar amount, indicated price, type of security
offered, business description of each company, and the underwriting
firm's name.
How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial News Pages
199
Growth mutual fund index
Yield-Curve Graphic Display
Plus Selected Interest Rates
Interest rates are important to everyone. The Fed Funds rate, FRB
Discount rate, rate of three-month Treasury Bills, the prime rate, rates
of 30-year Treasury Bonds and tax-exempt bonds, rate of Moody's AA
utilities, and 90 CDs' interest rates are graphed every day. A yield curve

200
Investing like a Professional
World stock market charts
of U.S. Treasury issues is also available daily. These important rates
should help you better plan your business financing, personal financ-
ing, and investing.
How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial News Pages
201

202
Investing like a Professional
Separate Convertible Bond
Tables with Key Data
Convertibles are shown in their own table with valuable data such as
S&P ratings, yield to maturity, volume, conversion price, and premium
or discount calculated and provided in order to save you time.
New Ideas from the
Companies in the News Page
Some of America's most dynamic, growing companies are spotlighted
every day on the "Companies in the News" section near the back of
Section II. (See page 203.) The companies surveyed on this page come
from an industry which has outperformed at least 75% of all others dur-
ing the previous six months. The high-ranked companies in that indus-
try are profiled, by an experienced business reporter who reviews each
firm in an 800-word article.
Along with in-depth editorial coverage, there are also three graphs
probing the stock-price movements of the company for one, five, and
fifteen years. These daily, weekly, and monthly basis graphs are packed
with so much significant fundamental data that with them you hopefully
have a way to make better-informed financial decisions. Incidentally,
Investor's Business Daily featured Cisco Systems 12 times from
December, 1990 to August, 1992 while it was a young, new company,
before it was covered in another national newspaper.
Be a Visitor to the New York
Analysts' Meetings
One of the most important forums for professional investors is the New
York Society of Security Analysts. The presidents and chief executive
officers of leading corporations appear before the New York analysts to
discuss the prospects for their companies and to answer questions from
analysts. In fact, these sessions are so well regarded that some investors
pay important sums for transcripts of what transpires.
Reporters attend analysts' meetings not only for the company appear-
ing at the New York analysts', but also for important analysts' meetings
in other cities. Those on-the-spot stories, along with graphs of the com-
panies, are presented regularly. Here is one great example you missed if
How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial News Pages
203

204
Investing like a Professional
you weren't reading the paper on February 11, 1988. L. A. Gear jumped
from $14 to an equivalent of $175 before it topped out.
Coverage of a 1988 New York analysts' meetings
National Economic Analysis
Regular editorials may also have some impact, and with the one on the
following page, we received a short, to-the-point letter from Don Regan,
then Chief of Staff to the President. The letter said, "...rest assured this
will get to all the right places and something will be done about it." The
How to Make Money Reading the Daily Financial News Pages
205
next month Paul Volker, then Federal Reserve Board Chairman, in a
speech in Canada, mentioned that money supply was only one of a
number of causes of inflation, and the following February the Fed
began the first of four consecutive discount rate cuts during the subse-
quent six months.
September 1985 editorial on Fed policy
Investor's Business Daily penned more than sixty editorials on the
serious defects and errors in our government's 1993 proposed total
reform of the American Healthcare system. These editorials were
bound into a booklet that was purchased by hundreds of business, polit-
ical, and media leaders. One daily reader, Jack Kemp, said Investor's
Business Daily carried the most informative coverage 011 this critical
national issue. Editorials appear daily on page 2.

206
Investing like a Professional
How to Utilize the News
Pages in a Bear Market
Below is a list of ideas that should be helpful in a declining market:
1. Are more corporate earnings reports coming in below estimates?
2. Use the new low list in conjunction with the stock tables to show a
stock's % change in volume when it makes a new price low.
3. Check the 90 minigraphs of "Stocks in the News" on the NYSE,
AMEX, and OTC market. There will be fewer stocks making new
highs and more showing huge increases in volume. Those closing
down in price might be selling situations in a bear market, especial-
ly if they are not extended too far below price-basing patterns.
4. Notice if there is a shift to defensive securities such as Foods,
Supermarkets, Gold, Tobacco, or Utilities. See if many defensive
group graphs show up in Friday's newspaper at the bottom of the
general market indicators page.
5. What are the weakest industry groups and the former leading
groups?
6. Are more stocks consistently underlined in the price tables than
are boldfaced?
7. Monitor quarterly earnings reports daily to spot poor reports in
stock positions that may need to be sold.
8. Check price tables for companies with relative strength breaking
below 70 and Volume % Change up when price is down.
9. Study the daily market averages on the general market indicators
page to determine bad market conditions as well as the eventual
beginning of the next bull market. Observe the Mutual Fund Index
and performance of foreign market averages for further clues. Is
the Fund Index persistently below its 200-day moving average line?
10. Watch for special news items daily on companies, industries, or the
economy. And be sure to check the NASDAQ chart.
11. Track weakening stocks that perhaps should be sold.
12. Which sector indexes are the weakest?
13. Save and study the New America page to get ready for the next bull
market.
17
The Art of Tape Reading:
Analyzing and Reacting to News
Tape reading is like seeing \he Super Bowl football game live from
the 50-yard line rather than reading about it in the paper the next day.
You see all the grand action, you feel the electricity in the air, and you
experience the overpowering emotion and excitement.
A tape reader is an investor or speculator who spends lime watching
both individual stock transactions as they are reported on the stock
exchange ticker tapes and absorbing news as it flows over the news wires.
A good tape examiner acquires a feel for the market and can tell you
whether stocks are behaving normally or not. Naturally, the number of
good tape readers is like the number of football players who are good
enough to play in a Super Bowl game.
Tape readers come in all sizes and shapes; many are "board room sit-
ters" gazing at the electronic tape in their local broker's office. Very few
of them do well, but you often hear them brag about their favorite
stocks or opinions. In time you'll hear one say, "There goes Motors," as
they see a stream of trading volume in General Motors stock.
Most stockbrokers peek at the tape, but once again only the minority
really have a knack for it. In some cities, the tape is broadcast on daytime
TV with a 15-minute delay for home viewers. I think the stock exchange
may be wrong in placing the 15-minute-delay restriction upon public
home-TV viewing. It could contribute to more nationwide public interest
in the stock market and more reliable information if the exchange
would reconsider and change its position. How would you like to see the
scintillating Super Bowl on TV with a 15-minute delay? TV real time,
over-the-counter trading should also be reported by ticker tape.
Institutional traders and some professional money managers also
study the tape. Jack Dreyfus was such an avid tape reader that he had

208
Investing like a Professional
tapes put in every office in his accounting department. If he happened
to leave his desk to go into the accounting area, he didn't want to risk
missing any important trades.
Jesse Livermore and Gerald Loeb of E. F. Hutton always watched the
tape. And of course, specialists on the floor of the New York Stock
Exchange have tapes all throughout the Main Room, the Blue Room,
and the Garage, as the different trading areas are called.
All transactions are supposed to be flashed on the ticker tape about
three minutes after the trade actually occurs on the floor of the stock
exchange. Sometimes, however, the volume of trading is so heavy even
the high-speed tickers can't keep up with the activity, and the tape falls
behind. This is called a late tape and it might be a more questionable
time to buy or sell because it is sometimes harder to know what the
actual prices are on the floor at the time you enter your orders.
Separating Leaders from
Laggards, via the Tape
Competent, experienced tape readers can weed out the stock leaders
from the feeble, laggard stocks in the market. How is this done?
After declining for several weeks, a market will finally turn and start
to rebound. The observant tape reader will notice which stocks are the
first ones to begin the rally.
The good tape student will also see which stock is drawing the largest
quantity of buying, in terms of the size and volume of transactions. He
or she will notice which equities move up with the greatest ease. If very
good, the tape reader will probably be able to spot the true leader in
the market.
Other stocks that are the last to respond in a rally, or stocks that only
trade light volume, are more sluggish and are the laggard movers to avoid.
During short-term declines in a bull market, the tape reader may
watch for stocks that for some reason persistently resist selling off along
with the rest of the market.
The tape analyst looks for a sudden pickup in volume and activity in a
stock previously quiet and inactive. They always look for the unusual activity.
The best tape readers are concerned more with volume in a stock
than with just watching the price. Several 20,000-share trades in a com-
pany's stock are much more significant than a hodgepodge of 200- and
300-share trades.
The Art of Tape Reading: Analyzing and Reacting to News 
209
It Isn't Your Aunt Sue Buying
For one thing, a 20,000-share trade in a $50 stock on a ^g-point uptick
from the prior trade represents a transaction involving $1 million
(20,000 X $50). The assumption is that some buyer is willing to pay up
three-eighths of a point to buy the slock. Because of the size you can
also be pretty certain it isn't your Aunt Sue down the street buying, but
probably a more informed buyer.
Before you decide you've discovered an easy way to make money sole-
ly by shadowing the ticker tape, let me assure you again the obvious
hardly ever works in the stock market. Experienced professionals know
investors are influenced by big trades appearing on upticks, so don't get
too carried away with what could be a well-advertised tape trap.
The real problem with tape analysis is the tape reflects all trading,
good and bad. Not all of the action you see on the tape is good, sound,
correct buying. Professionals who deal in big blocks buy a large number
of mediocre or poor stocks, or good stocks at the wrong time. So, it
becomes a question of sifting the white elephants from the smart buying.
Market manipulation by program traders also distorts prices.
Tape Reading Is Too Exciting
and Emotional
Another problem with tape watching is it is positively too exciting and
emotional. It requires constant discipline to avoid being swept along
with the rampant fever when a stock keeps advancing until you're con-
vinced it's going to go "straight through the roof."
When you get this feeling in the pit of your stomach, the stock is
probably topping, since it will also look fantastic to everyone else. When
it is that obvious, almost everyone has bought that can buy. Remember,
the majority, or crowd, opinion is rarely right in the stock market.
If you sit by the ticker tape too much, you just get too close to the for-
est to see the trees. And above all, the most important things a winner
must have in the stock market are perspective, discipline, and self-control.
Is the Stock in a Base or Is It
Extended?
There is an easy, effective way to periodically read the tape and exercise
strong discipline. Whenever you see tape activity that impresses you,

210
investing like a Professional
refer to the stock's chart to see if the stock is in a base-building period
or if it is extended from a base. If it is extended in price, leave it alone;
it's too late. Chasing stocks, like crime, doesn't pay.
If the stock is in a base (sideways price-consolidation area), then
check and apply the C-A-N S-L-I-M formula. Are current earnings up a
meaningful amount? Is the five-year earnings record good?
More than half the stocks that look inviting on the tape will fail to
pass the C-A-N S-L-l-M test and will prove to be deficient, mediocre
investments. However, sooner or later convincing tape action will point
you to a golden opportunity that passes all your criteria and could
become a star performer.
Scan Chart Books Weekly and
List Buy Prices
Another way to use the tape productively is to review a comprehensive
graph book every week and make a list of stocks that meet your techni-
cal plus fundamental selection criteria.
Then jot down the pivot price where you would consider buying. Also
write down the average daily volume for each stock on your prospect list.
Keep this shopping list with you every day for the next couple of weeks
when you are watching the ticker tape or the market. In time, one or two
of the stocks on your prospect list will begin prancing all over the tape
and will approach your buy point. This is the time to get ready to make a
possible buy decision—if the stock trades at your buy price and you con-
clude the day's volume will be up at least 50% above average. Generally,
the more demand for a stock at the buy point, the better.
Look for a Shift in Quality
Around the Top
After a short-term rally, or near a market top, a tape reader can fre-
quently discern a shift in the quality of the tape. The top-notch leading
stocks no longer lead the market up. Lower quality laggards and cheap-
er stocks now move to the front line of battle. This is a warning sign that
all is not right in the market, and a sharp correction might be just
around the next corner.
The Art of Tape Reading: Analyzing and Reacting to News 
211
Watch Out When Defensive
Stocks Begin to Appear
After an extended rally in the market, a tape reader may notice more
defensive stocks (food and utility stocks) cropping up on the tape. This
is an indication professional money is becoming apprehensive. In this
case, you should be cautious in continuing to buy.
There are other little symptoms and market habits the tape observer
will recognize. Some stocks have delayed openings and other stocks will
stop trading during the day. At certain times activity will become so
heavy that, to save time, digits are deleted from the ticker tape, with
numbers left off certain prices and volumes.
At other periods stocks may rally in rapid fashion, which creates the
impression of greater short coverings than normal. Periodically, the pace
of the market may become very slow. In these lulls, the ticker is known as
a "quiet or dull tape." Some traders say "don't sell a dull market."
Previously, the sound of the mechanical tape or the old paper tape
moving alerted the tape reader to a pickup or slowdown in the pace of
overall market activity. Now we have modern electronic tapes, which
move without a whisper.
Still other markets may, to the trained tape reviewer's eye and ear,
reflect a slow, steady pace of quiet, subtle accumulation. Sometimes on
the day before a long holiday weekend, those on the job are quietly and
steadily buying up stocks, while other less active souls are gone for the
weekend and miss what's transpiring.
Tape readers expect the pace of activity to slow down around lunch
time in New York (12:00 p.m. to 1:00 p.m., New York time, or 9:00 a.m.
to 10:00 a.m., Los Angeles time). They also know the market frequently
shows its true colors in the last hour of the day, either coming on and
closing strong, or suddenly weakening and failing to hold gains estab-
lished early in the day.
The careful eye can also spot a stock "churning" on the ticker tape.
This happens when a great deal of trading volume occurs but poor
price progress results.
In 1961, years before Bunker Hunt got involved in his silver fiasco, he
phoned me one day and said he had just come from lunch at a down-
town Dallas hotel. The rumor, he said, was that Glint Murchison was
going to buy control of a particular company that sold at about $16 on
the New York Stock Exchange.
He suggested buying the stock, and as he was talking, I watched the
stock trade in unbelievable reams on the ticker tape. However, most of

212
Investing like a Professional
the prices were unchanged and the price was not making any real
progress overall. I told Bunker to wait a few days. Something didn't
make sense to me, because if these rumors were true, why was the stock
churning on such immense activity and not making much headway?
Two days later, the news filtered out that Murchison had acquired
control of a block of stock outside the marketplace and had been sell-
ing short in the market the day Bunker Hunt telephoned. The stock
sold off on this surprising news. Now you have a firsthand example of
why tips and rumors are dangerous and can get you into trouble.
Don't Buy on Tips and
Rumors
I never buy stocks on tips, rumors, or inside information. It simply is an
extremely unsound investment practice. Of course, tips, rumors, or inside
information seem to be what most people are looking for. But, again,
what most people believe and do in the market doesn't work; so beware!
Certain advisory services and some daily business newspapers carry
regular columns fed by Street gossip, rumors, tips, and planted personal
opinions or inside information. This, in my opinion, is not the most
professional approach, nor is it too sophisticated. There are far sounder
and safer methods of investing in the stock market.
Bernard Baruch emphasized the importance of separating the facts of
a situation from tips, inside "dope," or wishful thinking. One of his
rules was to beware of barbers, beauticians, waiters—of anyone bringing
gifts of "inside" information or "tips."
Big Block Trades Represent
Institutions
In today's institutionally dominated markets, large numbers of big
blocks of stock trade every day. Many of these blocks of 10,000 to
500,000 shares or more are crossed by block houses (institutional bro-
kerage firms specializing in large transactions). Sometimes they repre-
sent both sides of the order, acting as broker for both the buyer and
seller. In certain of these cases it may be of value to know if a stock
exchange specialist has taken any stock in position on the block trade.
Block houses positioning (buying for their own trading account) a
block that trades on a big down tick from the prior trade will try to dis-
pose of their stock as soon as possible over the next few trading days.
The Art of Tape Reading: Analyzing and Reacting to News
213
Block trades unchanged or only l/s of a point above or below the prior
trade are confusing and misleading to the public and are sucker bait for
the uninitiated. Arbitrage and deliberate painting of the tape by cross-
ing blocks that are being sold on l/8 of a point upticks complicate the
analysis of large transactions.
Goldman, Sachs is perhaps the leading block house, with Salomon
Brothers also being a giant factor in this specialty. Block firms take
large risks and at times may run their block operations as a loss leader
to attract greater syndicate, bond, or other commission business.
Learning Ticker Tape Stock
Symbols
A good tape reader should learn the stock symbols of most of the lead-
ing stocks. All slocks have an abbreviated ticker symbol, such as GM for
General Motors, T for American Telephone, and XON for Exxon.
Symbols are easy to learn. However, there are many newly listed
stocks each year, so you have to keep abreast of new symbols. Some new
listings, particularly on the American Stock Exchange or NASDAQ mar-
ket, can become exciting growth leaders in certain types of market
cycles where the AMEX or NASDAQ is in favor.
Below is an example of the New York Stock Exchange ticker tape.
This sample shows a 10,000-share block of IBM which traded at 1545/s
(the first two digits, 1 and 5, are deleted) as well as 100-share trades in
General Electric, J.P. Morgan, Hewlett Packard, American Express, and
Merrill Lynch. A big block of 1,500 American Telephone and Telegraph
traded at 34V£.
Since many equities tend to move in industry groups, a seasoned tape
reader will usually look for confirmation of strength in at least one
other important stock in the same group. For example, if Aluminum
Co. of America shows unusual strength in the market, you would expect
either Alcan Aluminum, Reynolds Metals, or Kaiser Aluminum to also
show strong price and volume action.

Investing like a Professional
214
Don't Buy into Overhead
Supply
Last, a professional tape reader always avoids buying securities as they
approach former overhead supply price areas and will wait to see if a
stock is able to break through its recent overhead supply zone before
considering purchase.
Many amateur and even professional investors do not understand the
fundamental but critical principle of overhead supply, so out of igno-
rance they make poor stock selections. Ignorance in the stock market
always costs money.
Watch for Tape Distortion
Around Year's End
A certain amount of distortion can occur in the activity in optionable
stocks around option expiration dates. There is also a significant
amount of year-end distortion in stocks during December and some-
times through January and early February.
The year's end is a topsy-turvy, tricky time for anyone to buy stock since
numerous trades are made for tax considerations. Many low-grade losers
will suddenly seem strong, while former leaders lie idle or correct. In time,
this misleading activity dissipates and the true leaders reemerge.
General market sell-offs also occasionally start after the beginning of
a new year, which further adds to the difficulty. Fake-out action can
occur with one big "up" day followed by a big "down" day, only to be fol-
lowed by another big "up" day. For these reasons, I would periodically
just as soon take a vacation in January.
In addition to watching the New York Stock Exchange tape, which is
now called a consolidated tape because it also shows transactions from
regional exchanges, tape readers can view the Dow Jones News Tape,
which continually provides company news and comments from around
the world. Reuters also supplies an excellent news service.
Analyze Upticks and Down
Ticks
One helpful tool in judging overall performance is to analyze a stock's
upticks and down ticks. The total blocks over a period of time that
occurred on plus ticks of V4 point or more from the previous trade can be
compared to the total volume on '4-point or more down ticks in a stock.
The Art of Tape Reading: Analyzing and Reacting to News
215
The Daily Graphs service has a computerized screen that tabulates
the top 50 stocks in the overall market for the past week in terms of net
plus ticks shown on the stock exchange ticker tape. A separate list of the
top 50 on-balance minus tick stocks is also given. These lists might be
significant in picking up net accumulation or distribution in stocks. But
be careful. Not every stock under accumulation by an institution is a
correct investment decision. They, too, make many lackluster choices.
An active do-it-yourself investor with enough study might, in time,
even be able to recognize when specific large institutions are buying.
This could be done by analyzing and becoming very familiar with quar-
terly portfolios of several of the most active and aggressive large institu-
tional portfolios.
When a stock trades at its buy price, the individual investor can usual-
ly afford to wait for the first block or two to show on the tape. The small
investor, if skillful, has the advantage of waiting until the force behind
the move is so powerful that the stock has to thrust out of its base pat-
tern. The institutional buyer usually feels a need to start a little earlier,
due to its size disadvantage.
Investors should be careful not to assume that a big block on the
down side from the previous trade is always a dark sign. Once a block
overhanging the market is out of the way, a stock customarily will finally
rally. Specialists that take blocks on big down ticks will usually try to
dump their position on upticks afterwards.
View Key Stocks as General
Market Indicators
Some tape detectives feel specific stocks are predictive of the entire mar-
ket. The saying used to be, "As General Motors goes, so goes the mar-
ket." This is not necessarily always true. However, at times certain key
industry leaders in the stock market, such as IBM, may be viewed in this
fashion. Many professional traders feel if Merrill Lynch stock gets
in trouble, the general market may be headed down. This may be true in
some, but not all, cases.
Another telling tape reading indication is when a powerhouse that
had led its industry into new highs in the last year or two fails to lead its
group anymore when others in the industry make new highs.
Thus, for the winning amateur investor who has the time and self-
control, learning to read the ticker tape properly could be a useful tool
to add to other investment skills.

216
Investing like a Professional
Interpret and React to Major
News
When news of consequence hits the street about the U.S. economy, our
government, foreign countries, or international events, the capable
tape sleuths are sometimes less concerned with whether the news is
good or bad than they are in analyzing the news effect on the market.
For example, if the market yawns at national news that appears to be
bad, the investor will feel positive since this is an indication the underly-
ing market may be stronger than originally believed.
On the other hand, if highly positive news strikes the market and
stocks give ground slightly, the tape analyst might conclude the under-
pinnings of the market are weaker than previously believed. The essen-
tial point is not always whether the news is good or bad but how the
market handles itself in face of seemingly positive or negative news.
Sometimes the market overreacts or even counteracts favorable items or
disappointing news. On Wednesday, November 9, 1983, someone ran a
full page ad in The Wall Street Journal predicting rampant inflation and
another 1929 depression. The ad appeared during the middle of an inter-
mediate correction in the market. Its warnings were so overboard and
exaggerated that the market immediately responded with a rapid 17-point
advance and the beginning of a rally that lasted for several days.
There is also a marked difference between a market that tumbles for
a couple of days on definite scare news, which is easy to understand and
explain, and one which slumps noticeably on no apparent news at all.
The experienced tape investigator will have a good memory or keep
records of all past major news events and how they affected the market.
These would include important items, such as President Elsenhower's
heart attack, the Cuban missile crisis, the Kennedy assassination, an out-
break of war, the Arab oil embargo, and rumors of various government
actions such as wage and price controls, U.S. flagging of Kuwait oil
tankers in the Persian Gulf, or unsound legislation pending in Congress.
Old News versus New News
Both good and bad news becomes old news after being repeated several
times, and it will frequently have the opposite effect on the stock mar-
ket than it had when the item initially appeared. This is, of course, the
opposite of how propaganda and disinformation work in totalitarian
countries—the more a lie or distortion is repeated to the masses, the
more it comes to be accepted as a truth. When a news item has become
widely known or anticipated, it is usually discounted by experienced
individuals in the marketplace, blunting the effect of its release.
The Art of Tape Reading: Analyzing and Reacting to News
217
News can also be very paradoxical and confusing to the market neo-
phyte. For example, a company can have a bad quarterly earnings
report released and the stock may go up in price when the news is
reported. When this occurs, it is often because the news was known or
anticipated ahead of time and a few professionals may decide to'buy or
cover short sales once all of the bad news is finally out. Some institu-
tions may feel they are wily to follow the old saw, "Buy on bad news."
Others believe they should provide support for one of their large posi-
tions at a difficult time.
Analyzing the News Media
There are several excellent books written on the subject of analyzing
national news. Humphrey Neill, author of the 1931 classic Tape Reading
and Market Tactics, also wrote The Art of Contrary Opinion, which
carefully examines the way identical news stories are reported quite dif-
ferently in the various cities' newspaper headlines, and how that can be
misleading to stock owners.
His contrary opinion investment theory is developed by illustrating how
frequently conventional wisdom or accepted consensus opinion expressed
in the national news media turns out to be ill-conceived or wrong.
Media expert Bruce Herschensohn wrote a short, easy-to-read book
entitled The Gods of Antenna. It specifically tells how our national TV
news can manipulate and bias the news to influence and help form pub-
lic opinion. It was published in 1976 by Arlington House in New
Rochelle, New York. Another book on the subject is The Coming Battle
for the Media, published in 1988 by William Rusher.
The most outstanding study on the subject was published in 1986 by
Adler & Adler, 4550 Montgomery Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland, entitled,
The Media Elite, by authors Rothman and Lichter. In it, they interview 240
journalists and top staffers at The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal,
The Washington Post, and Time, Newsweek, and U.S. News & World
Report magazines, and the news departments of ABC, CBS, NBC, and PBS.
When asked to rate their fellow workers' leanings, they said by a margin of
seven to one their co-workers were mostly on the liberal left versus the
conservative right. Eighty-five percent of the top national journalists were
found to be liberal and voted the Democratic ticket in recent elections.
How the national news is edited and presented does dramatically affect
every investor, our economy, public opinion, and public confidence in the
economy, our government, our President, and the stock market.
To succeed financially as individual investors or as a nation, we need
to learn to separate with better insight and perspective the relevant
accurate facts from the national media's own political agenda, personal

18
How to Pick the Best
Industry Groups, Subgroups,
and Market Sectors
Common stocks, like people, tend to move in groups. Each market
cycle is led by specific industries. One time, computer and electronic
stocks may be the leading groups, and in another period, retail or
defense stocks will. According to computer analysis, 37% of a stock's
price movement is due to subgroup influence and 12% to major group
influence.
Normally the leading industry throughout one bull market will not
come back and lead in the next cycle, although there are some irregu-
lar exceptions to this rule. Groups that emerge later in a bull market
now and again are early enough in their own stage of improvement to
weather a bear market and resume advancing to set the pace in the next
bull market.
In our institutional service every week the computer arranges each of
the 200 groups in order of their group relative-price strength for the
last six months. The strongest categories are shown in Volume I of the
Database books and the weaker groups are contained in Volume II each
week. Buyers operating on the undervalued philosophy love to do their
prospecting in Volume II.
Analysis has shown that stocks in the top 50 or 100 groups, on aver-
age, perform better than those in the bottom 100. We are, therefore,
more interested in companies in Volume I of the institutional service.
As a typical rule, the top quartile of groups perform substantially bet-
ter pricewise than do the bottom quartile of groups. In the period from
1970 through 1982, the best-performing listed individual stocks
belonged to industry groups with a median strength rank of 61 out of
How to Pick the Best Industry Groups, Subgroups, and Market Sectors
219
200. This median industry-price rank of 61 was measured just before
each stock's big price increases began.
Why Track 200 Industry
Categories?
Why do we divide securities into 200 industry groups rather than the 82
groups categorized by S&P? In our modern economy there are many
new segments to every industry. We call them subgroups.
For example, in the 1970 market, if economic research told you to
look for an improvement in housing and a big turn in the building
cycle, what stocks would have been included in your definition of the
building group? Many institutions used Armstrong Corporation,
Georgia Pacific, U.S. Gypsum, Johns Manville, and the like.
Rather than one building group, there were actually 10 different sub-
segments to the building industry in the 1971 bull market. That means
10 different ways you could have played the building boom.
You could have invested in gypsum stocks, the lumber and plywood
group, the plumbing group (Masco), home builders (Kaufman & Broad),
mobile homes or low-cost housing, building material retailers and whole-
salers (Standard Brands Paint, Scotty's Home Builders), the mortgage
insurance group (MGIC), the air-conditioning group, the carpet industry,
and the related cousin group of home furnishings and furniture.
Guess where the traditional building stocks were during 1971? That's
right; they were buried deep in the back of Volume II (the weakest sec-
tion) of the institutional database service all year, while newer subgroup
sectors of the building industry in Volume I (the front half) of the ser-
vice advanced over 200%!
In the 1978 to 1981 market sequence, the computer industry was one
of the leading groups. Traditionally oriented money managers then
considered the industry to consist of IBM, Burroughs, Sperry Rand, and
the like. However, these were only large mainframe computer manufac-
turers. They failed to perform during that cycle, while the many subdivi-
sions of the computer industry had unbelievable performance.
You could have selected the minicomputer group (Prime Computer),
the microcomputer family (small home computers, such as
Commodore International), the graphics group (which included cad-
cam manufacturers like Computervision), word processing companies
(Wang Labs), the peripheral group, the computer software industry
(Cullinane Database), or the time-sharing industry. These winners
increased five to ten times in price.

Investing like a Professional
220
Industries of the Future or
Past?
There will be many new subgroups in the future, imaginative applica-
tions most of us haven't thought of yet. As this endless stream of inge-
nious offshoots of the original mainframe industry multiply every year
or two, exciting new subgroups to monitor will be added to our data-
base. Change and new technology are occurring in the United States at
an accelerating pace. Automation is also the way we keep track of it.
After all, we are in the computer, communications, and space age.
New inventions and technologies will spawn thousands of new and supe-
rior products and services. Space research should be promoted.
Industries of the future can create gigantic opportunities for every-
one. Industries of the past, while at times quite interesting, may present
less dazzling possibilities.
Here are a few older industries whose greatest growth was possibly in
the past (unless, of course, major changes occur).
1. Steel
2. Copper
3. Aluminum
4. Gold
5. Silver
6. Oil
7. Textile
»
8. Chemical
9. Paper
10. Railroad
11. Railroad equipment
12. Utilities
13. Tobacco
14. Airlines
15. Old-line department stores
Industries of the future might include:
1. Computer, computer-related services, and software
2. Laser
How to Pick the Best Industry Groups, Subgroups, and Market Sectors
221
3. Electronics
4. Communications
5. New concepts in retailing
6. Space exploration and research
7. Medical and drug
8. Special services
A Stock's Weakness Can Spill
Over to the Group
Displaying and monitoring stocks by industry groups can also help get
you out of weakening investments faster! After a stretch of success, if one
or two important stocks in a group break seriously, their weakness will
usually wash over into the remaining issues in that field, sooner or later.
Weakness in several principal building stocks was the paramount indi-
cation in February 1973 that Kaufman & Broad and MGIC were vulnera-
ble and should be sold, even though Kaufman & Broad and MGIC had
to that date resisted the failure of sister stocks.
At that time there was unanimous agreement by fundamental
research firms that MGIC had a 50% annual increase in earnings locked
in for the next two years, and it would merrily continue its course, unaf-
fected by the building cycle. The analysts were very wrong, as MGIC
later collapsed along with the rest of the deteriorating group.
In February 1973, ITT traded between $50 and $60 while every other
stock in the conglomerate classification to which ITT belonged had
been in long declines. The two central points overlooked by four lead-
ing research firms that recommended ITT in 1973 were:
1. ITT was in a very weak group.
2. For the prior 20 months, ITT had been in a steady downtrend in rel-
ative price strength even though the stock's price had held up.
Oil and Oil Service Stocks
Top in 1980-1981
This same 'Vash-over effect" within groups was seen in 1980-1981 after a
long period of advance in oil and oil service stocks, when our early warn-

222
Investing like a Professional
ing criteria caused us to put stocks like Standard Oil of Indiana,
Schlumberger, Gulf Oil, and Mobil on the sell or avoid side in late 1980.
A few months later, we recognized we had turned negative on almost
the entire oil sector and that we had seen the top in Schlumberger,
which was the most outstanding of all the oil service companies. One
simply had to conclude that, in time, the weakness would wash over into
the complete oil service industry.
Therefore, we put equities like Hughes Tool, Western Co. of North
America, Rowan Companies, Varco International, and N L Industries
on the sell side even though the stocks were making new price highs
and showed quarterly earnings escalating in some cases 100% or more.
These moves baffled many experienced professionals on Wall Street
and at large institutions.
However, we had documented and studied the historical precedence of
how groups topped in the past. Our actions were based on sound princi-
ples and facts that had worked over decades, rather than on personal
opinions of analysts or one-sided information from company officials.
Within a few months all of these stocks began substantial declines as
professional money managers slowly realized that once the price of oil
had topped and the major oil stocks were under liquidation, it would be
only a matter of time before oil drilling activity would be cut back.
This single decision to advise clients to sell oil and oil service stocks
from November 1980 to June 1981 was perhaps one of our more valu-
able calls. We even told a Houston seminar audience at The Galleria
Plaza Hotel in October 1980 that the entire oil sector had topped.
Seventy-five percent of those in attendance owned petroleum stocks.
They probably didn't believe a word we said.
We were not aware at the time, or even in the several months following,
of any other New York Stock Exchange firm that had taken a negative
stand across the board on the energy and related drilling-and-service sec-
tor. In fact, the exact opposite occurred.
In the July 1982 issue of the Institutional Investor magazine, 10 ener-
gy analysts at eight of the largest and most respected brokerage firms
took a highly positive view and advised purchasing these securities, as
they appeared cheap because they had had their first correction from
their price peak.
This is just another example of how opinions, even if they come from
the very highest places, are frequently wrong when it comes to making or
preserving money in the stock market. The behavior of markets is usually
right. Analysts that do not understand this are destined to cause some sub-
stantial losses for their clients. Decisions like the above are one of the rea-
sons why we were able to become a leading research and strategy input to
of tVip Iv^tffr i
investors in
How to Pick the Best Industry Groups, Subgroups, and Market Sectors
223
Has the Stock Market Really
Changed?
Many inexperienced investors somehow think the market today is very dif-
ferent. Some maintain it is more volatile. Others believe because it is dom-
inated by institutions, many of the old methods don't work anymore.
Still others feel that with so much information available, everything is
known and already discounted in the price of stocks. Stocks, as a result,
are efficient, they feel, so attempts at stock selection are destined to fail.
I was astonished to read as late as the early 1980s that some respected
publications still repeated such academic nonsense.
Program trading is a recent development which can be disruptive and
harmful and scares the public. For this reason, I think it should be
restricted by the SEC or the Stock Exchange. (The 50-poirit rule helps.)
The simultaneous execution and ganging up on a broad list of 150 blue
chip stocks selected by a computer is unnerving and distorting.
However, my experience is that precious litde has changed. The same
old things happen in the market, cycle after cycle; it's just that the players
are different. I'll give you an example to illustrate that what happened in
1973 and 1981, with weakness in certain stocks of a group spilling over
and affecting the rest of die flock, happened years earlier in 1961.
The Bowling Boom Tops
Brunswick stock was a prominent performer in 1960 and 1961.
Throughout Brunswick's tremendous move that began in 1958 until its
peak in 1961, AMF, a stock that also made automatic pinspotters for
bowling alleys, gyrated pretty much in unison with Brunswick. After
Brunswick peaked in March 1961, it rallied back from $50 to $65. But
for the first time, AMF did not recover with Brunswick. This was the
subsurface tip-off that the move in Brunswick was not going to last, that
the stock should be sold—the entire group had made a long-term top.
One practical rule is to avoid buying any stock unless there is confir-
mation of its strength and attractiveness by at least one other important
stock in the same group. The few instances where this confirmation is
missing should be in stocks you can classify as totally uniqvie companies.
Walt Disney should have been classified at points in the past as a unique
entertainment company, rather than just a company in the unsteady
movie group.
Through our building of historical models in the stock market, there
are two other valuable concepts we've discovered. The first we named
the "follow-on group effect."

224
Investing like a Professional
The "Follow-On Group Effect"
When efficient new jet aircraft took to the skies in 1963 through 1965,
airline stocks also flew. As a result of materially increased air travel, the
hotel stocks had a tremendous bull market beginning in 1967. Loews
and Hilton were big winners. A shortage of hotel space was the follow-
on effect caused by the large increase in air travel.
When the price of oil grew dear in the late 1970s, oil companies
began drilling like mad for the pricey substance. As a follow-on result,
rising oil prices not only fueled a huge price surge in oil common
stocks in 1979, but oil service stocks gushed the next year as oil compa-
nies aggressively stepped up exploration.
The roaring sales success of small- and medium-sized computer man-
ufacturers during the 1978-1981 bull market created the "follow-on"
demand for computer service, software, and peripheral products in the
market resurgence of late 1982.
Use the Cousin Stock Theory
We labeled the second concept the "cousin stock theory." If a group is
doing exceptionally well, there may be a distinctive supplier company
that is also enjoying expanding sales.
In 1965, Boeing was selling many new jet airliners as a result of esca-
lating airline demand. A cousin stock to Boeing was Monogram
Industries which, of all things, supplied chemical toilets for all the new
jets. Monogram earnings increased 200%, and this little gem had a
1000% advance.
In 1983, Fleetwood, a leading manufacturer of recreational vehicles,
was a big winner in the stock market. Textone was a small "cousin stock"
because it supplied vinyl-clad paneling and hollow-core cabinet doors to
recreational vehicles and mobile home companies.
Basic Conditions Change in
an Industry
Most industry group moves occur because of a substantial change in the
conditions in an industry. For example, in 1953 aluminum and building
stocks had a powerful bull market due to the pent-up demand for hous-
ing that was the follow-on aftermath of war. There was such a shortage
of gypsum board that gypsum salespeople were offered new Cadillacs by
some contractors just to let builders buy a carload of wallboard.
In 1965, the onrush of the Vietnam war, which was to cost $20 billion
or more, created a solid demand for electronics. Companies such as
How to Pick the Best Industry Groups, Subgroups, and Market Sectors
225
Scan Measures of an
Industry's Relative Strength
Industry group-strength ratings are published by many services. On the
next page is an example of group ratings which appear every week in
the Daily Graphs service. A scan of this list each week will show you not
only which groups are currently strongest, but which groups have just
moved into the top 100. This could be an early indication of possible
new group leadership when confirmed by other fundamental economic
checks.
On August 14, 1970, the mobile home sector crossed into the top 100
groups arid remained in the top 100 until February 12, 1971. The group
returned to the top 100 on May 14, 1971, and fell into the bottom half
on July 28, 1972. In the prior cycle, mobile homes were in the top 100
groups in December 1967 and dropped to the bottom half in 1969. The
price advances of mobile home stocks were spellbinding during these
positive periods.
Fidelity Funds of Boston also shows more than 25 industry mutual
funds whose recent performance can be checked to spot the best-acting
industry sectors.
Listed below are the leading industry groups of each bull market
from 1953 through early 1994.
1953-1954 
Aerospace, aluminums, building, paper, steels
1958 
Bowling, electronics, publishing
1959 
Vending machines
1960 
Foods, savings & loan, tobacco
1963 
Airlines
1965 
Aerospace, color television,.semiconductors
1967 
Computers, conglomerates, hotels
1968 
Mobile homes
1970 
Building, coal, oil service, restaurants, retailing
1971 
Mobile homes
1973 
Gold, silver
1974 
Coal
1975 
Catalog showrooms, oil
1976 
Hospitals, pollution, nursing homes, oil
1978 
Electronics, oil, small computers
1979 
Oil, oil service, small computers

226
1982
1984-1987
1988-1990
1990-1994
Investing like a Professional
Apparel, autos, building, discount supermarkets, military
electronics, mobile homes, retail apparel, toys
Generic drugs, foods, confectionery and bakery, supermar-
kets, cable TV, computer software
Shoes, sugar, cable TV, computer software, jewelry stores,
telecommunications, outpatient healthcare
Medical products, biotech, HMOs, computer peripheral/
LAN, restaurants, gaming, banks, oil and gas exploration,
semiconductors, telecommunications, generic drugs, cable TV
You can purchase a 35-year wall chart from Investor's Business Daily
that shows all the leading groups as they occurred in the market and
the three or four individual stocks that lead each group. Investor's
Business Daily also publishes wall charts covering 50 years of news
events and key economic and market indicators.
TOP 50 INDUSTRY GROUPS
Weekly industry group ratings
How to Pick the Best Industry Groups, Subgroups, and Market Sectors 
227
The Importance of Tracking
Thousands of OTCs
Early tip-offs of groups that will emerge as leaders in a new bull market
cycle can, at times, be found by observing unusual strength in one or
two over-the-counter issues and relating that strength to similar power
in a listed stock of the same group.
Initial strength in only one listed stock is not sufficient to attract
attention to a category, but confirmation by one or two kindred over-
the-counter companies can quickly steer you to a new industry recovery
in development. To do this, it is necessary to actively follow several
thousand stock charts. Many institutional investors only closely study
several hundred companies. (See Centex Builders, OTC, March-
September 1970, and Kaufman & Broad, NYSE, April-September 1970.)
1. Centex Corporation's relative strength in the prior year was strong
and made a new high three months before the stock's price did.
2. Note accelerating earnings, + 50%, during the June 1970 quarter.
3. In March-September 1970, the stock was selling near an all-time high
at the bottom of a bear market.
4. A strong Centex (OTC) base coincided with the base in Kaufman &
Broad (NYSE).
Simultaneous strength of two different stocks in an industry
Picking 1982's Leading
Groups
In July 1982, we sent a wall chart to institutional accounts. It displayed
16 defense electronic stocks, because we deduced from analysis of the
7000-stock database that this would be one of the leading groups in the

228
Investing like a Professional
next bull market. Numerous OTC stocks such as Electrospace Systems
and Atlantic Research helped us arrive at this early conclusion.
While economic indicators are generally not effective in helping pre-
dict moves in the stock market, there are, on occasion, some extremely
profitable exceptions when you analyze specific industries. The
unprecedented move in oil service stocks in 1980 was clearly forecast by
industry employment statistics.
67% of Winners Are Part of
Group Moves
Analyzing the most impressive stocks from 1953 through 1993 proved
that two out of three of the big market winners were part of group
advances. The importance of being on top of your job each week and
being aware of new group movements should not be ignored.
In addition to narrow industry categories, there are broad general
economic sector groupings, such as basic industry cyclical stocks, con-
sumer goods and services, transportation, finance, and high-technology
stocks. In database research we also pay attention to areas of the coun-
try where corporations are located. In our Datagraph rating of compa-
nies as far back as 1971, we assigned extra points for those headquar-
tered in Dallas, Texas, and other key growth or technology centers in
the United States, such as Santa Clara County and Los Angeles.
Shrewd investors should also be aware of projected growth rates over
the next few years for various age groups in America. From such data it
is possible to predict potential future growth for certain industries.
Because of the upsurge of women in the workplace and the gush of
baby boomers during the 1980s, the women's apparel group, led by
Limited Inc. and Dress Barn Inc., soared straight out of sight between
1982-1983 and 1986.
Defensive Groups Flash
General Market Clues
It is also important for market buffs to know the defensive stock groups.
Prime defensive industries are gold, silver, tobacco, foods, grocery
chains, and electric and telephone utilities. If you see increased buying
begin in a number of these stocks after a couple of years of a bull mar-
ket, you may be witnessing an indication that many of the bull market
groups could be near a top. Prolonged weakness in the Utility Average
could also forecast increasing interest rates and a bear market ahead.
How to Pick the Best Industry Groups, Subgroups, and Market Sectors
229
When analyzing industries, we have found some to be so small that
signs of strength in the group might not be relevant. For example, if
only two small, light-trading companies make up a sector, it may not be
enough to call a group. On the other hand, there are industries with
too many companies, such as the chemical industry. This excessive sup-
ply does not add to their attractiveness unless some extremely unusual
changes occur in their industry conditions.
Is Your Stock in the Top Half
of Its Own Group?
The institutional service arranges companies within an industry in
order of their current week's computerized Datagraph rating. Quality
stocks in the top half of their own group are better investments in
almost all cases than are stocks in the bottom half of the same group.
Because every graph measures the same crucial investment factors on
a comparable basis, a manager or analyst can quickly screen every alter-
native in a group by comparing 120 basic factors of one stock to anoth-
er. In 15 minutes, an experienced professional can pinpoint the two or
three equities in a group which appear worthy of further fundamental
research. The remaining stocks that do not measure up should be elimi-
nated from additional consideration.
An institution could save its research department a great deal of time
and money if it checks extensive data such as this first to determine the
stocks that have the best chance of gaining greater market acceptance.
This suggestion alone might save millions in needless research
expenses and substantially increase efficiency and performance of pen-
sion fund portfolios. This, in particular, could be a boon to some state
and educational funds, which really need the money but have, in the
past, sometimes operated under antiquated methods and rules and, as a
result, achieved relatively undistinguished results.
Before concluding this section, you must know that the gold group
moved into the top half of all 200 industries on February 22, 1973.
Anyone ferreting out such information received the first crystal clear
warning of the worst market upheaval that has occurred since 1929.
So, if you want to produce superior results in the stock market, you
can't ignore the market strength or weakness of the 200 industry groups
and subgroups.

19
Improving Management
of Pension and Institutional
Portfolios
If you own a mutual fund or your employer has a company pension
fund, it is quarterbacked by an institutional money manager and you, as
an individual investor, have a vested interest in knowing that he or she
is doing the job professionally.
Today's markets are dominated by institutional investors. That's per-
haps good, because investing in the market can be a full-time business.
Below is a list of institutional investors that, according to CDA Investment
Technologies, Inc., of Rockville, MD, performed substantially better than
average during the 5-year period that ended April 30, 1990. Professional
5 Years Ended 4/30/90
Armualized rate of return
Bank pooled funds
NCNB
Sun Bank, N.A.
Bank One, Indianapolis, N.A.
Fidelity Management
State Street Bank & Trust Co.
31.0%
24.4%
22.6%
21.5%
21.2%
Mutual funds
Financial Strategical Portfolios-Health Sciences
20th Century Gift Trust
Hartwell Emerging Growth
AIM Constellation
Vanguard Special Portfolio-Health Care
24.0%
22.9%
20.9%
20.7%
20.7%
Improving Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios
231
investors do not panic as easily on the downside as the public on occasion
might. In fact, institutional buying support is commonly seen at prices on
the way down.
Institutions also manage immense sums. For example, the California
State Teacher's Retirement System and Public Employees' Retirement
System's flow of new money to be invested is approximately $600 mil-
lion per month. The total new monies being pumped into pension
funds overall could increase by as much as 15% per year in the future.
Almost all institutional purchasing is 100% cash, with no borrowed, or
margin, money used, so this builds a far sounder foundation for your
securities than if more speculative margin accounts ruled our stock mar-
kets. (In 1929, the public was heavily involved in the stock market, specu-
lating with 10% cash and 90% margin.) There is so much competition
and evaluation of performance records today that the best professional
investment managers are probably more proficient than 20 years ago.
The problems the stock market encountered from 1969 to 1982 were
caused by economic mistakes and bad policy decisions made by our top
politicians in Washington, B.C., not by institutional or public investors.
The stock market is like a giant mirror that merely reflects basic condi-
tions, political management, and psychology in the country.
Having managed individual accounts, pension funds, mutual funds,
having supervised research analysts and dealt closely with many top insti-
tutional money managers, I have a few observations about some of the
more difficult or debatable areas of professional money management.
I certainly am not perfect, and I've made my grand share of mistakes
over the years; that's how all of us learn and, hopefully, become wiser.
Maybe my having "hands on" experience with all sides of the street
through many economic cycles will make a few of these attempts at con-
structive suggestions valuable.
If you are an individual investor, extra insight into the subject of the
world's institutional money managers should be helpful because they
are the enormous force behind 80% of the important price moves in
the market. After all, institutions represent the "I" in our C-A-N S-L-I-M
formula, and they exert far greater influence upon stock prices than
specialists do.
The First Datagraph Books
Those initial 600-page research books were possible for us to produce
because of our daily database on the stock market and a new piece of
equipment known as a high-speed microfilm plotter.

232
Investing like a Professional
At the time, this costly computer machinery was so new no one knew
how to get a picture of graphs out of it. Once this barrier was cracked, it
was possible to turn out complex updated graphs at the rate of one a
second, in an automated process.
Today, a single institutional Datagraph displays 94 fundamental and
26 technical essential facts about a company. The same 120 variables
are available for every company in the database. This means an analyst
can compare any company to any other company either in the same
industry or in the entire database.
Interpreting Dome
Petroleum's Datagraph
The Datagraph of Dome Petroleum on the facing page has been
marked up to highlight a few of the ways to interpret and use this
graphic display of fundamental information. We recommended Dome
to institutions in November 1977, at $48. Fund managers didn't like the
idea or the company's nonconservative accounting, so we bought the
stock ourselves. Dome Petroleum became one of our biggest winners of
the decade. The case studies you are seeing are real live examples of
how it is actually done.
The Pic'n'Save Story
Another stock we recommended in July 1977 that no institution would
originally buy was Pic'n'Save. Most felt the company was too small
because it only traded 500 shares a day. So we began purchasing it sev-
eral months later. We had historical models of K-Mart when it traded
only 1000 shares a day in 1962 and Jack Eckerd Drug in April 1967
when it traded 500 a day.
Both of these retailers grew into tremendous winners after they were
discovered. Average daily trading volume of these issues, as a result,
steadily increased. Historical precedence was on our side.
I've always thought of finding an outstanding stock and buying it
every point on the way up. That is almost what happened with
Pic'n'Save. We bought it every point or two on the way up for several
years. I particularly liked the company because they provided a way for
families of meager means to buy most of the necessities of life at excep-
tionally low prices.
Thirty Positive factors on Dome Petroleum in November 1977

234
Investing like a Professional
This little, unknown company headquartered in Carson, California,
turned in a steady and remarkable performance for seven or eight
years. In fact, Pic'n'Save's pretax margins, return on equity, annual
earnings growth rate, and debt-to-equity ratio were at that time superior
to other, better-accepted institutional growth favorites which we had
also recommended, such as Wal-Mart Stores. Our early purchases
showed over a tenfold gain when the stock was finally sold. The stock
was purchased on 285 different days and held for a period of V'/g years.
Sometimes it seemed that if it wasn't Chock Full O'Nuts (located in
New York City), Wall Street was not too aware of the company and
cared even less.
Radio Shack's Charles Tandy
I ran into this same phenomenon in 1967 when we first uncovered
Tandy Corp. We convinced only two institutions to buy Tandy stock at
that time. Among the reasons given for not buying were that Charles
Tandy was just a promoter and the stock didn't pay a dividend.
When I met Tandy for the first time in his office in downtown Fort
Worth, Texas, my conclusion was the opposite of Wall Street's initial
verdict. Charles Tandy was a brilliant financial man who also happened
to be an outstanding salesman (a combination seldom found).
Tandy had innovative incentives, departmental financial statements,
and highly detailed computer reports on the sales of every item in every
store by merchandise type, price, and category. His automated invento-
ry and financial controls were almost unbelievable.
After the stock tripled, Wall Street analysts began acknowledging its
existence, and a few research reports started coming out noting what an
undervalued situation Tandy was. Isn't it strange how far some stocks
have to go up before they begin to look cheap to everyone?
One of the secrets you, as a winning individual investor, should never
forget is that you want to buy a stock when it is not completely obvious
to everyone. In fact, you'll find few or no research reports available on
the very best stock ideas. When several reports show up, it's time to sell.
The Size Problem in Portfolio
Management
Many institutional money management organizations feel their key dif-
ficulty is size. Because they manage billions in assets, there never seem
to be enough big capitalization stocks they can buy or sell easily.
Improving Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios
235
Size is a realistic problem. It's easier to manage $10 million than $100
million and simpler to manage $100 million than $1 billion, and $1 bil-
lion is a piece of cake compared to running $10 billion, $20 billion, or
$30 billion. The size handicap simply means it is hard to buy or get rid
of a huge stock holding in a small- or medium-sized company.
I believe it is a mistake for institutions to restrict investments solely to
large capitalization companies. There aren't enough outstanding large
capitalization companies in the first place. Why buy a slow-performing
stock just because you can easily acquire a lot of it?
From 1981 through 1987, during the Reagan administration, for the
first time in history 3000 dynamic, up-and-coming companies had initial
public offerings of stock. Many of these small- to medium-sized entre-
preneurial concerns will become future market leaders.
Today's markets are more liquid, with the daily volume of many medi-
um-sized stocks averaging 100,000 to 500,000 shares a day. In addition,
significant crossing of blocks occurs between institutions.
Individual corporations seeking partly to relieve size problems can
divide their money among a number of different money managers.
The institutional asset manager who professionally manages billions
of dollars would best be advised to substantially broaden the universe of
stocks considered for potential investment to the 4000 or so available.
This is preferable to restricting activities to the same limited, approved
list of only a few hundred large, well-known or legal list-type companies.
The research department of one of the largest banks in the United
States only follows 600 companies.
A sizable institution would likely be better off owning 500 companies
of all sizes than 100 large, mature, slow-moving companies.
Size Is Not the Key Problem
Size is not the number one problem of institutions. By far the number
one trouble is the investment philosophy and particular investment
methods utilized by some money management operations.
Many institutions buy stocks based on someone's opinion about the
supposed value of a company. Others buy stories. Still others follow
economists' top-down predictions of the broad sectors that ought to do
well. We believe working from the bottom up produces better results.
For many years institutions used the same standard names and rarely
changed their stodgy approved lists. If an institution had 100 widely
accepted names on its list, it might add four or five a year and no more.
Many decisions had to be approved by investment committees.
Committees make pitifully poor decisions in the stock market!

236
investing like a Professional
Investment committees even had members who were not experienced
money managers. This is, generally, questionable investment policy.
Ancient rules even today inhibit investment flexibility. For example,
some institutions are restricted from buying stocks that do not pay a divi-
dend. This limitation seems in the dark ages because many outstanding
growth stocks deliberately do not pay a dividend so they can reinvest their
profits to continue internally funding their above-average growth rate.
Other restrictions mandate that half or more of the portfolio be invest-
ed in bonds. Most bond portfolios have produced weak results over the
long term. Some of these bond portfolios historically used misleading
accounting that did not mark their portfolio to current market prices.
In these few situations, reporting of bond portfolio results is too
infrequent and the true overall performance is unclear. Too much
emphasis is on yield and not enough is on the increase or decrease in
market value of the assets in the portfolio.
Bottom Buyers' Bliss
Many institutions buy stocks on the way down and might be categorized
as bottom guessers. This is, in some instances, not the best way to pro-
duce a superior performance record. It can place decision makers in
the position of buying a stock that is slowly deteriorating.
Some money management organizations use evaluation models to select
and restrict their investments to stocks in the lower end of past P/E ranges.
While this approach definitely works for a few unusually capable con-
servative professionals, it is not the best selection method and over time
does not produce truly superior results for the typical institution or
individual investor. Several major midwestern banking organizations
have continually lagged in performance due to utilizing this approach.
Undervalued-Stock Buyers
Usually Lag
A major insurance company in New York that relied heavily on the
undervalued method lost a huge account in 1983 due to steady under-
performance.
I have witnessed hundreds of institutions and every type of invest-
ment philosophy imaginable over the last quarter century, and most of
those that concentrate on the undervalued theory of stock selection
Improving Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios
237
invariably lag in the results produced when compared to the better
money managers today. Sometimes these undervalued situations get
more undervalued or trail the market for a considerable time.
Comparing Growth versus
Value Results
Over the previous 10 business cycles, it has been my experience that the
very best money managers produced average annual compounded total
returns of 25% to 30% and that they were either growth-stock managers
or the majority of their successful investments were in growth stocks.
The best undervalued type managers in the same period averaged
15% to 20%, with a few a little over 20%. Of course, the best were defi-
nitely in the minority, with the majority not doing this well. Up to now,
most individual investors haven't prepared themselves well enough to
average 20% or more per year, regardless of the method used.
Value Line Dumps the
Undervalued System
The Value Line service, from the 1930s up to the early 1960s, rated
stocks it followed as undervalued or overvalued. The company's results
were mediocre until they dumped their system in the 1960s and began
rating stocks based on earnings increases and relative market action.
Since the switch, their performance has materially improved.
Years ago there was a relatively small number of fund managers avail-
able for corporations or individuals to choose from. But today there is a
proliferation of outstanding professional money management teams
using various successful systems.
Institutions frequently require a lengthy glowing report from their
research analysts before they can buy a stock not on their approved list.
Since the institutions already own a substantial number of companies
which they insist their analysts continually follow and update, an analyst
might be to a year or more (or never) in getting all the interesting new
names onto an approved list and preparing reports on these ideas.
Superior performance comes from fresh ideas, not the same old
overused stale names. This too little-too late method should be reap-
praised.

^
238 
Investing like a Professional
Overweighting and
Underweighting to the S&P
Many institutions invest primarily in stocks in the S&P 500 and try to
overweight or underweight positions in certain sectors. This practice
assures they will never do much better or worse than the S&P average.
An outstanding growth stock manager should be able to average about
1/£ times the S&P index over a period of many years.
Weaknesses of the
Industry-Analysts System
Another widely used and fairly ineffective practice followed both by
research firms and most institutional investors' research departments is
to have a huge number of analysts with their responsibilities for compa-
ny coverage broken down by industries.
For example, the classical securities research department has an auto
analyst, electronics analyst, oil analyst, retail analyst, drug analyst, and
on and on. The problem with this method is its tremendous inefficiency
and its tendency to perpetuate mediocrity in performance. What does
an analyst assigned two or three out-of-favor groups do? Recommend to
their money managers the least bad of all the poor stocks followed by
the analyst.
On the other hand, is an oil analyst outstanding just because the oil
group is the big performing group for the year and he or she picks two or
three good winners? When the oil stocks boomed in 1979 and 1980, all of
them doubled or tripled. The best ones shot up five times or more. The
theory behind this method of dividing research is that a person can be an
expert on a particular industry. In fact, Wall Street firms go so far as to
hire a chemist from a chemical company to be their chemical analyst and
a Detroit auto specialist to be their automotive analyst.
These individuals frequently know many of the nuts and bolts about
their industry but in some cases have a dubious understanding of the
stock market and what makes leading stocks go up and down. Of
course, it is stocks and the stock market that determine how successful
your investments will be. (Incidentally, do you know what makes a stock
go up? A stock generally goes up because it has fewer buyers. They just
happen to be bigger buyers.)
Firms also like to advertise they have more analysts, the largest
department, or more top-ranked "all star" analysts. I would rather have
five good analysts who are generalists than 30, 40, or 50 who are con-
fined to limited specialties. And what are your chances of finding 30 or
Improving Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios
239
more analysts who are all outstanding at making money in the stock
market or at coming up with money-making ideas?
Financial World's Startling
Survey of Top Analysts
A Financial World magazine article dated November 1, 1980, found that
analysts selected by Institutional Investor magazine as the best (all-star)
analysts on Wall Street were overrated, overpaid, and materially under-
performed the S&P averages.
As a group, the "superstar" industry analysts failed on two stock picks
out of three to match either the market as a whole or their own industry
averages. They also seldom provided sell recommendations, limiting
most of their advice to buy or hold. Investment banking creates conflicts.
The Financial World study confirmed research we performed in the
early 1970s. In that study, we found that only the minority of Wall Street
recommendations were successful. We also concluded that in a period
where many sell opinions would have been proper, only one out of
every ten reports made sell suggestions.
One of the unsolved problems is that 80% of the research in Wall
Street today is written on the wrong companies. Every industry analyst
has to turn out a certain amount of product. Buy only a few industry
groups lead a typical market cycle. There is insufficient front-end
screening or control to determine which are the superior companies on
which current reports should actually be written.
The Daily Pile of Research
Reports
Most institutional money managers daily receive a stack of research
reports a foot or so high. It's a great waste of time trudging through
these trying to find a good stock to buy. If you are lucky you may spot
one company out of twenty that is right to buy.
Database Power and
Efficiency
With massive automation we rapidly screen through over 8000 compa-
nies in our database. If we become interested in the defense industry,
we can call up 225 different corporations whose primary business is in

240
Investing like a Professional
the defense area, whereas the typical institution might look at the stan-
dard names followed on its approved list, such as Boeing, Raytheon,
United Technologies, and two or three other big, well-known names.
With 120 comparable variables on each of the 225 companies stretch-
ing back for a number of years, as well as the ability to display these vari-
ables quickly on identical graphic displays, it is possible, in 20 minutes,
to determine the five or ten companies in the entire group that possess
outstanding characteristics worthy of more detailed research.
The remaining companies, because they showed deficiencies on
many vital variables, need not even be researched because of the sub-
standard characteristics uncovered in the initial screening. In other
words, you can generally help tell an institution's analysts where they
should spend their time more productively. Yet, few research depart-
ments are organized to take advantage of such advanced and disci-
plined procedures.
How well has this approach worked? In 1977, we introduced an insti-
tutional service called New Stock Market Ideas and Past Leaders to
Avoid. It is published every week, and its documented 16-year perfor-
mance record is shown on the following page (+ 7126%).
Buy selections outperformed avoid suggestions more than 20 to 1,
and buy picks outran the S&P 500 stocks over tenfold. The compound-
ing over the 16 years' time helps make a record like this possible.
We provide institutional investors with computerized quarterly
reports showing the performance of every buy and avoid recommenda-
tion made in the New Stock Market Ideas service.
In our organization, all analysts are young MBAs who have had a few
years of varied business experience before coming to us.
We like to send two analysts on all company visits. However, we do
not call on many companies. Having a massive amount of factual data
on every firm, we are able to discover a corporation beginning to
improve or to get into trouble much earlier.
Also, this method has the advantage of not being gullibly dependent
on whatever the company happens to tell analysts. We have no invest-
ment banking clients or market-making activities, and we do not man-
age money for others, so those areas of potential bias are nonexistent.
Between June 1983 and June 1984 we gave 385 sell recommendations
to institutional investors who subscribed to our consulting service. In no
case was it necessary for us to have inside information or talk to the
company or its officers before providing sell suggestions.
It is naive to believe companies are going to tell you when they are start-
ing to have problems. By using our own data and research, we also thor-
oughly discourage any reliance on tips, rumors, and inside information.
Wr ilist Hon'f neerl want or hHif»vp in the IISP nf insirlp infnrm^tirin

Investing like a Professional
242
Is In-House Pension Fund
Management the Answer?
A few corporations that become disillusioned with their pension fund
performance decide to move their money in-house. I doubt that going
in-house provides any serious advantage because the problem is still the
same. How do you find those few experienced people who know what
they are doing and are able to produce excellent performance?
Another growing trend is the number of new investment counseling
groups formed by standout people that left major institutions. Below is
only a small list of a few of these enterprising organizations.
Clement Capital, Inc.—New York, NY
Essex Investment Management Co., Inc.—Boston, MA
Friess Associates, Inc.—Greenville, DE
Hellman, Jordan Management Co., Inc.—Boston, MA
Husic Capital Management—San Francisco, CA
INVESCO Capital Management, Inc.—Atlanta, GA
Jundt/Capen Associates—Minneapolis, MN
Railing Capital Management—Chicago, IL
Kunath, Karren, Rinne & Atkin, Inc.—Seattle, WA
Nelson, Benson & Zellmer, Inc.—Denver, CO
Nicholas-Applegate Capital Mgmt., Inc.—San Diego, CA
Northern Capital Management, Inc.—Madison, WI
Sirach/Flinn, Elvins Capital Mgmt.—Seattle, WA
Southeastern Asset Management, Inc.—Memphis, TN
On a different subject, certain institutions may allow some of their
important investment policies to be overly dictated by their attorneys.
For example, attorneys may say an institution should not pay up for
research or they should pay cash for research. My experience is that
some attorneys are so cautious or adamant they may prevent realistic
and sound business decisions.
There are a few institutional investors that dictate they will only pay 6
or 7 cents a share for any order executions. These restrictive internal
policies are sometimes set up by their attorney. They can always find
some brokerage firms that will execute at the very cheapest prices, but
they will probably lose access to the best research organizations. Once
Improving Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios
243
again, always buying the cheapest execution and the cheapest available
research can substantially hurt your long-term performance.
On still another subject, many large money-management groups deal
with entirely too many research firms. For one thing, there aren't that
many strong research inputs, and dealing with 30 or 40 different firms
dilutes the real value and impact of those few good ones. The confu-
sion, doubt, and fear created by the conflicting advice given by several
firms at critical junctures can be exceptionally expensive.
The 1982 and 1978 Full-
Page Bullish Ads
Let me provide you with an example. We placed a full-page ad in The
Wall Street Journal early in 1982 stating that the back of inflation had
been broken and we believed the important stocks had already made
their lows. In May 1982, we mailed out wall charts showing 20 consumer
growth stocks and another wall chart on defense electronic issues we
believed might be attractive for the bull market ahead.
In May 1982, we made a special point to go to New York and Chicago
and contact several large institutions. In these meetings we stated a bull-
ish posture and provided a list of names that should be purchased.
The stance we took was diametrically opposed to the position of most
institutional research firms at that point and to the negative flood of
news appearing daily in the national media.
Most firms were outright bearish, predicting another big down leg in
the market and projecting that interest rates and inflation were going to
soar back into new high ground under pressure of massive government
borrowing that would crowd the private sector out of the marketplace.
The ill-founded fear and confusion created by these questionable
judgments frightened large institutional investors so much they hesitat-
ed and could not fully capitalize on the fact that the two leading groups
for the newly evolving bull market that was quickly to follow had already
surfaced and had been identified.
It appeared professional managers had been bombarded with so
much "expert" negative Wall Street input that they found it hard to
believe these positive findings. By investing fully on margin in the sum-
mer of 1982, we internally produced the largest performance in the
firm investment account in any year since the beginning of the firm.
This account had a twenty-fold increase in profits from 1978 to 1991.
Events such as this make us believe it is an advantage not to be head-
quartered in rumor-filled and emotion-packed Wall Street.

244
Investing like a Professional
Improving Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios
245

246
Investing like a Professional
The savvy individual investor has a gigantic advantage in not having
to listen to 50 different strongly held opinions. Perhaps the common-
sense lesson you, the private investor, can learn from this example is
that majority opinions seldom work in the stock market and stocks seem
to require a wall of worry, doubt, and disbelief to climb. Fear is proba-
bly the strongest emotion in most of us.
We generally do not attempt to call every short-term or intermediate
correction, as sometimes this could be a little foolish and shortsighted
for the institutional investor. Primary concentration is on recognizing
and acting upon the early stage of a new bull market and on the early
beginning phase of each hew bear market. This focus includes search-
ing for the market sectors and groups that should be bought and those
that should be avoided.
In March 1978, we entered our first full-page ad in The Wall Street
Journal predicting a new bull market in small- to medium-sized growth
stocks. This ad was written weeks ahead of time and we waited to run it
until we felt the time was right. This "just right" time happened to be
when the market was making new lows and caught investors by surprise.
Our only reason for placing the ad was to document in print exactly
what our position was at that juncture so there could be no question
with institutional investors later on.
The time when an institutional research firm can be of inestimable
value is at these extremely difficult turning points, where many people
are petrified with fears or carried away with excessive fundamental sto-
ries, information, and overconfidence.
If you don't think fear and emotion can ride high among profession-
al investors, it can. I remember meeting with a group of the top three
or four money managers of one important bank at the bottom of the
market in 1974. They were about as totally shell-shocked, demoralized,
and confused as anyone could possibly be. (They deserved to be; the
ordinary stock in the market was off 75%.)
I recall seeing another prime manager about that same time who was
thoroughly worn out and actually suffering from market sickness, judg-
ing from the peculiar color of his face.
In that period, one of the top mutual fund managers in Boston
looked as if he had been run over by a freight train! Of course, all of
that is preferable to what happened in 1929, when a few people jumped
out of office buildings.
While we no longer place full-page ads in the Journal or Barron's for
obvious reasons, we do have more than 600 of the leading institutional
accounts in the United States and around the world that receive our
confidential market memos when we feel a major market change could
be in process.
Improving Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios
247
The following is verbatim the last memo written before the current
edition of this book was published. It projects a moderately bearish
1994 with most growth stocks topping. Sometimes these memos are
right and sometimes they are not. This one gave institutions ten weeks
of rally to sell into before the market topped in late January 1994. Of
course, almost all institutions either were unsure, argued with the con-
clusions, or just found it impossible to reduce commitments and hold
cash when the market was strong and going up. Institutions had less
cash in April 1994 than they had in November 1993.
TO: Institutional Clients
FR: William O'Neil
RE: November 19, 1993 Market Memo
For the past four weeks, we have continued to add a large number of this
year's growth leaders to the sell/avoid side in our New Stock Market Ideas
and Big Cap service. We believe a bear market has started in these stocks.
Examples included companies like Best Buy, Promus, Int'l Game
Technology, Cabletron, Countrywide Credit, Dial Page, Glenayre,
Newbridge, Nextel, Qualcomm, Tellabs, etc. These stocks are different
from the Philip Morris, Novell, Nike, and Waste Management names
added to the avoid category earlier this year. The recent changes cover a
broad area in the high tech and gambling sectors, the two leading groups
of the year. If you combine this with noticeable weakness in the banks,
insurance and utilities stocks, the breadth of the distribution that has
taken place is significant.
Here are a few other pertinent facts: the general market (S&P arid
DJIA) on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, November 2-4, came
under abnormal liquidation on heavy volume. Likewise, the daily breadth
suffered its sharpest two-day drop in two years and was unable to rally
back. The IBD Mutual Fund Index also had its sharpest two-day break, as
did the NASDAQ average. We believe that the NASDAQ and AMEX aver-
age had a speculative price climax on heavy volume four weeks earlier
and has since been in a topping process. On Wednesday, November 17,
the relative price strength line on the NASDAQ Composite shown in
Investor's Business Daily broke below its support low of four weeks ago on
360 million shares.
Laggard stocks have been up in recent weeks and the bond market has
been down. Last month was an all-time record for new issues and both
Zacks and Value Line introduced major new investment services for the
public. Both the DJIA and the S&P 500 have shown wedging patterns with
no ability to follow through. Interest has revived in gold as a place to
hide, even though the fundamentals are not powerful. Finally, the market
on a yield and PE basis has been in overvalued territory for some time
now. On a worldwide perspective, Europe and Japan still do not have
strong economies.
We do not believe this is just another short-term correction and do not
believe a stock like Intel is a value simply because it sells for nine times
earnings. We expect an earnings slow-down over the next several quarters
for Intel. Furthermore, we see a number of market leaders that are top-

248
Investing like a Professional
ping and expect the next three months and much of 1994 to be a some-
what more difficult year.
Many of President Clinton's proposals appear to us to be unsound, par-
ticularly in the healthcare area. Our estimate is that 10 years from now,
more than $1 trillion in new taxes will be needed to fund his enormous
new program. Price controls along with government management could
lead to other difficulties. There also seems to be a credibility problem
with the President. The Administration says they've decided against price
controls, eveiyone will get to choose his or her own doctor, the system
will be better and we'll save more money. Most of his statements are mis-
representations of the facts contained in his plan submitted to Congress.
Our suggestion is to reduce your portfolio volatility and reduce portfo-
lio concentration in aggressive stocks and groups. We do not, however,
expect any bear market correction that might occur to be of a substantial
nature (when compared to historical bear markets). Perhaps 15% might
be a reasonable guesstimate, because America is in an entrepreneurial
phase with hundreds of emerging new companies and new technologies
that will cushion any adjustment. We are also in a low interest rate, low
inflationary environment with the economy showing a degree of pick-up.
How High-Techs Topped
At the opposite end of the pole. I remember a high-tech seminar given
in 1983 in San Francisco that was attended by a crowd of 2000 highly
educated, ebullient, and self-confident analysts and portfolio managers.
Everyone was there. That marked the exact top for high-tech stocks.
Over the years there have also been some funny situations. We gave a
presentation to a bank in another large city. The bank brought in all of its
analysts. Close to 20 people were sitting around an impressive table in the
board room. Not one analyst or portfolio manager asked any questions
during or after the entire presentation. It was the strangest situation I've
ever seen, and I've never seen it since. Needless to say, this institution con-
sistently performed in the lower quartiles when compared to its more alive
and venturesome competitors. It's important to communicate.
Years ago, one medium-sized bank for which we did consulting work
insisted we give them recommendations only from the stocks they car-
ried on their limited approved list. After consulting with them each
month for three months and telling them that there was nothing on
their approved list which met our qualifications for buying, we had to
honorably part company. A few months later we learned that key offi-
cials in that trust department were relieved of their jobs due to their
laggard performance for the past several years.
A poor practice followed by some large money-management organiza-
tions with relatively unrewarding performance is to fire the head of the
investment department and trot outside for a successor who invests in pretty
Improving Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios
249
much the same way. Naturally, this does not solve the problem of deficient
investment methods and philosophy that continues to be perpetuated.
Security Pacific Bank in Los Angeles was an exception to this rule. In
July 1981, it made a change in its top investment management, but it
brought in an individual with a completely different approach and
superior investment philosophy, as well as an outstanding performance
record. The results were dramatic and were accomplished almost
overnight. In 1982, Security Pacific's Fund G was ranked number one in
the country.
At still another midwestern institution we provided consulting recom-
mendations but they were of doubtful value because the institution was
wedded to the cast-in-concrete belief that any potential investment must
be screened to see if it passed an undervalued model.
Clearly the best investments rarely show up on any undervalued
model. There is no way this institution will ever produce a first-rate
result until it changes its philosophy and throws out its undervalued
model. This is exceedingly hard for large organizations to do. It's per-
haps like attacking deep-seated religious habits and asking a Baptist to
become a Catholic or vice-versa.
Penny Wise and Performance
Foolish
Some corporations place entirely too much emphasis on saving manage-
ment fees, particularly when they have giant funds to be managed.
Usually an actuary convinces them of the tremendous dollars their pen-
sion fund can save by shaving the management fee just one-eighth of 1%.
If companies have billions of dollars to be managed, they should
increase the management fees and incentives so the money managers
can hire the best money-makers available in the marketplace. The bet-
ter money managers will earn the extra one-quarter or one-half of 1%,
10 or 20 times over. The last thing you ever want is cheap advice in the
slock market. If you were going to have open heart surgery, would you
select the doctor who would do it for the absolutely cheapest fee?
Modern Portfolio Theory Not
Recommended
As discussed earlier, modern portfolio theory, a strictly theoretical
approach that emanated from statisticians in the academic world,
acquired a following with a number of institutions in the 1970s.

250
Investing like a Professional
This effort has proven to be almost a complete waste of time, since its
theories were built on assumptions that were not true. One of the rea-
sons that it gained acceptance was many institutions did not understand
the market as well as they should have and were, therefore, susceptible
to the seemingly plausible application of statistical formulas by college
professors.
Of course, most of the university professors who devised these new
answers to the stock market had very limited understanding of, or real
success with, the stock market. Every study we have conducted and virtu-
ally every organization utilizing these statistical methods has shown the
concept to be inferior to that used by today's more successful money-
management organizations.
All the random-walk theories, to me, are like the experts who years
ago claimed a baseball didn't curve, that it was just an optical illusion.
The only thing that can be said about these overeducated, sheltered
experts is that they certainly never had to stand at home plate and have
a pitcher fire a pitch right at their head before curving a foot and a half
over the outside edge of the plate where it was impossible to hit. Actual
experience quickly unravels a lot of academic theories.
A few of these academicians have taken jobs on Wall Street. Coming
from a world of poorly conceived dividend discount models, it will be
interesting to observe how they fare in the real world.
Modern portfolio theory should not be used by institutional investors;
it should not be taught in business schools, and it should not be forced
upon young analysts studying to pass CFA examinations. It is, in my
view, a tremendous misuse of valuable time.
How to Select and Measure
Money Managers Properly
Here are a few tips for corporations and organizations that want to farm
out their funds to money managers.
In general, managers should be given a complete cycle before you
compare and evaluate their performance for purposes of changing
managers—from the peak of one bull market period to the peak of
another cycle or the trough of one cycle to the trough of another. This
will usually cover a three- or four-year period and will allow all man-
agers to go through both an up market and a down market.
At the end of this period, the bottom 20% or so of the managers in
total overall performance should then be replaced. Thereafter, every
year or two the bottom 5% or 10% of managers over the immediately
prior three- or four-year period should be eliminated.
Improving Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios
251
This avoids hasty decisions based on disappointing performance over
a short period of a few quarters or in any one year. Given time, this
process will automatically lead to a positively outstanding group of
proven money managers. And it should stay that way, because you'll
have a sound, longer-term, self-correcting mechanism, and you won't
need to pay outside consultants to tell you when they think you should
suddenly replace managers.
In your selection of managers, consideration could be given to their
latest three- to five-year performance statistics as well as to a more
recent period. Diversification should be considered among the types,
styles, and locations of managers. The search should be widespread and
not limited to one consultant's narrow, captive universe or stable of
managers.
The corporate or pension fund client with money to be managed has
to also be especially careful not to interfere at critical junctures—for
example, deciding at some time that a greater proportion of their hired
managers' portfolios should be either in stocks or bonds or that under-
valued stocks should be emphasized.
Clients can intercede by attempting to direct where commissions
should go or by directing that executions be given to whoever will pro-
vide the cheapest executions. The latter, while a well-meaning attempt
to save money, commonly results in forcing upon a money manager
someone that provides poorer executions or no research input of real
value. This handicap costs the portfolio money as it pays l/s, V4, or /£
point or more on trades being executed by more inexperienced people.
Meddling corporate sponsors usually think they are saving money.
Another practice that should be seriously curtailed is that of a corpo-
rate plan sponsor dictating that portions of the commissions from exe-
cution of fund orders be directed to a third party who will then largely
rebate them to the corporation. This siphons off incentive dollars that
should be used to pay for the best research, execution, and market
ideas available to the fund's money manager. A fund will positively
never be able to buy the "best market brains" at the cheapest price.
State and Educational Funds
Could Do Better
The investment methods used by some state and educational funds
could be improved. Some employ fairly deficient methods of stock
selection. Once these so-so investment decisions are made, the decision
makers tend to ride through the years with losing investments.

252
Investing like a Professional
Taxpayers normally have to ante up when these funds have mediocre
performance. In some cases, states might be better off turning their
investment portfolio over to several professional money managers
rather than having it run by state employees.
Is an Index Fund the Way to
Go?
One last thought about the indexing of equity portfolios. A key fallacy
of index funds is the bold assumption that a pension fund's basic objec-
tive should be to match some general market index. This is a dangerous
and false conclusion.
For example, if we were to go through another 1929, and the general
market indexes were to decline 90% in value, no intelligent trustee
could possibly believe his or her fund's objective should be to lose 90%
of its value. Positively no one would be happy just because they achieved
their target of matching the market indexes' disastrous performance.
I actually saw a version of this happen in 1974. I was called in to eval-
uate a fund that lost exactly 50% of its assets because it was managed by
an organization that specialized in. and promoted index funds. The
irony of the situation was that the corporation was furious at such hor-
rendous losses, but of course this sort of bad performance by an index
fund was hushed up and never allowed to be publicized in the press. It
was an embarrassment to the company.
I have also seen several index funds that failed to keep up with the
index they were supposed to match. Once this occurred, the master
planners went back to the drawing board and came up with new ver-
sions of indexing which injected more human judgment into formulas.
This human analysis and personal analytical opinion contradicted the
broad assumption that index funds began with in the first place.
My answer to the whole thing is simple. Why should anyone expect
the majority of thousands of money managers to do any better than an
average or mediocre job, any more than the majority of musicians, ball
players, doctors, teachers, artists, or carpenters perform better than
average? The truth of the matter is that the typical person in many
fields might be a slightly subpar performer.
The answer in money management is the same as in other occupa-
tions—to get above-average results, you have to go out of your way to find
the small minority of managers who are above average in their profession.
To say this is impossible and just can't be done is narrow-minded and
foolhardy. To say that stocks are a random walk and you can't select
securities successfully because all information is already known and
Improving Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios
253
Value Line's rating system since 1965 is ample evidence that stocks
can be selected which materially outperform the market. Our top
Datagraph-rated stocks have substantially outperformed market aver-
ages over the 30 years from 1964 through 1993.
Professor Marc Reinganum of the University of Iowa, during a
University of Chicago sabbatical produced an independent research study
entitled "Selecting Superior Securities." He selected nine variables compa-
rable to those discussed in this book and achieved a 1984-1985 research
result 36.7 percentage points greater than the S&P 500.
The stock market is neither efficient nor a random walk simply
because there are too many poorly conceived opinions, too many incor-
rect interpretations, and too many emotions such as pride, doubt, fear,
and hope. Sometimes there are just shallow or bad judgments, numer-
ous complex variables, and fast-changing events which analysts do not
properly weight even when they possess all relevant information, which
is the exception rather than the rule. And finally, there are just too
many poor fundamental and technical research reports always recom-
mending mediocre-acting stocks or stocks off in price. Sell recommen-
dations are few and far between at the beginning of each bear market
because everything is always a buy on the way down.
One of the nation's largest retailers indexed part of its pension fund,
because its fund was so huge and unwieldy to manage. The other part
they managed internally. I'll end this chapter with a fascinating story
about this retailer that illustrates how large older companies react to
new opportunities compared to how fast-growing entrepreneurially-
managed companies react.
The head of investments for this large retailer was visiting with me in
Los Angeles. 1 took him out to Colton, California and showed him the
first Price Club warehouse store that had just opened in the Los
Angeles area. I said, "Dave, this is what your company should be doing."
He replied that it looked a little like one of their warehouses in
Chicago. At a later board meeting, I'm told he presented the idea to
top management and was laughed out of the place.
Several months later, Sam Walton flew out to San Diego, talked to
Saul Price and went through one of their stores. That night when he
returned to Bentonville, Arkansas, his architects were up all night draw-
ing plans for the first SAM's warehouse stores for Wal-Mart.
I know we were pleased with Price Co. since we discovered it early on
and held their stock for S'/g years while it was performing well during
the early 1980s. Institutional investors might do well to emphasize
entrepreneurially-run companies that are in business less than 15 years.

20
18 Common Mistakes
Most Investors Make
Rnute Rockne, the famous Notre Dame football coach, used to say,
"The way to succeed is to build up your weaknesses until they become
your strengths." The reason the rank and file either lose money or achieve
embarrassing results is because they simply make too many mistakes.
Over a period of 35 years, I have dealt with or known thousands of
individual risk takers, all the way from green beginners and amateurs to
the most knowledgeable and successful professionals. Following are the
mistakes I have noticed made most frequently by individual investors
who were not too successful.
1. Most investors never get past the starting gate because they do
not use good selection criteria. They do not know what to look for to
find a successful stock. Therefore, they buy fourth-rate "nothing-to-
write-home-about" stocks that are riot acting particularly well in the
marketplace and are not real market leaders.
2. A good way to ensure miserable results is to buy on the way down
in price; a declining stock seems a real bargain because it's cheaper
than it was a few months earlier. For example, an acquaintance of mine
bought International Harvester at $19 in March 1981 because it was
down in price sharply and seemed a great bargain. This was his first
investment, and he made the classic tyro's mistake. He bought a stock
near its low for the year. As it turned out, the company was in serious
trouble and was headed, at the time, for possible bankruptcy.
3. An even worse habit is to average down in your buying, rather
than up. If you buy a stock at $40 and then buy more at $30 and average
out your cost at $35, you are following up your losers and mistakes by
18 Common Mistakes Most Investors Make
255
putting good money after bad. This amateur strategy can produce seri-
ous losses and weigh you down with a few big losers.
4. The public loves to buy cheap stocks selling at low prices per
share. They incorrectly feel it's wiser to buy more shares of stock in
round lots of 100 or 1000 shares, and this makes them feel better, per-
haps more important. You would be better off buying 30 or 50 shares of
higher-priced, sounder companies. You must think in terms of the num-
ber of dollars you are investing, not the number of shares you can buy.
By the best merchandise available, not the poorest. The appeal of a $2,
$5, or $10 stock seems irresistible. But most stocks selling for $10 or
lower are there because the companies have either been inferior in the
past or have had something wrong with them recently. Stocks are like
anything else. You can't buy the best quality at the cheapest price!
It usually costs more in commissions and markups to buy low-priced
stock, and your risk is greater, since cheap stocks can drop 15% to 20%
faster than most higher-priced stocks. Professionals and institutions will
not normally buy the $5 and $10 stocks, so you have a much poorer-
grade following and support for these low-quality securities. As dis-
cussed earlier, institutional sponsorship is one of the ingredients need-
ed to help propel a stock higher in price.
5. First-time speculators want to make a killing in the market. They
want too much, too fast, without doing the necessary study and prepara-
tion or acquiring the essential methods and skills. They are looking for
an easy way to make a quick buck without spending any time or effort
really learning what they are doing.
6. Mainstream America delights in buying on tips, rumors, stories,
and advisory service recommendations. In other words, they are willing
to risk their hard earned money on what someone else says, rather than
on knowing for sure what they are doing themselves. Most rumors are
false, and even if a tip is correct, the stock ironically will, in many cases,
go down in price.
7. Investors buy second-rate stocks because of dividends or low
price-earnings ratios. Dividends are not as important as earnings per
share; in fact the more a company pays in dividends, the weaker the
company may be because it may have to pay high interest rates to
replenish internally needed funds that were paid out in the form of div-
idends. An investor can lose the amount of a dividend in one or two
days' fluctuation in the price of the stock. A low P/E, of course, is prob-
ably low because the company's past record is inferior.
8. People buy company names they are familiar with, names they
know. Just because you used to work for General Motors doesn't make

256
Investing like a Professional
General Motors necessarily a good stock to buy. Many of the best invest-
ments will be newer names you won't know very well but could and
should know if you would do a little studying and research.
9. Most investors are not able to find good information and advice.
Many, if they had sound advice, would not recognize or follow it. The
average friend, stockbroker, or advisory service could be a source of los-
ing advice. It is always the exceedingly small minority of your friends,
brokers, or advisory services that are successful enough in the market
themselves to merit your consideration. Outstanding stockbrokers or
advisory services are no more frequent than are outstanding doctors,
lawyers, or baseball players. Only one out of nine baseball players that
sign professional contracts ever make it to the big leagues. And, of
course, the majority of ball players that graduate from college are not
even good enough to sign a professional contract.
10. Over 98% of the masses are afraid to buy a stock that is beginning
to go into new high ground, pricewise. It just seems too high to them.
Personal feelings and opinions are far less accurate than markets.
11. The majority of unskilled investors stubbornly hold onto their
losses when the losses are small and reasonable. They could get out
cheaply, but being emotionally involved and human, they keep waiting
and hoping until their loss gets much bigger and costs them dearly.
12. In a similar vein, investors cash in small, easy-to-take profits and
hold their losers. This tactic is exactly the opposite of correct invest-
ment procedure. Investors will sell a stock with a profit before they will
sell one with a loss.
13. Individual investors worry too much about taxes and commis-
sions. Your key objective should be to first make a net profit. Excessive
worrying about taxes usually leads to unsound investments in the hope
of achieving a tax shelter. At other times in the past, investors lost a
good profit by holding on too long, trying to get a long-term capital
gain. Some investors, even erroneously, convince themselves they can't
sell because of taxes—strong ego, weak judgment.
Commission costs of buying or selling stocks, especially through a dis-
count broker, are a relatively minor factor, compared to more important
aspects such as making the right decisions in the first place and taking
action when needed. One of the great advantages of owning stock over real
estate is the substantially lower commission and instant marketability and
liquidity. This enables you to protect yourself quickly at a low cost or to
take advantage of highly profitable new trends as they continually evolve.
14. The multitude speculates in options too much because they think
it is a way to get rich quick. When they buy options, they incorrectly
18 Common Mistakes Most Investors Make
257
concentrate entirely in shorter-term, lower-priced options that involve
greater volatility and risk rather than in longer-term options. The limit-
ed time period works against short-term option holders. Many options
speculators also write what is referred to as "naked options," which are
nothing but taking a great risk for a potentially small reward and, there-
fore, a relatively unsound investment procedure.
15. Novice investors like to put price limits on their buy-and-sell
orders. They rarely place market orders. This procedure is poor
because the investor is quibbling for eighths and quarters of a point,
rather than emphasizing the more important and larger overall move-
ment. Limit orders eventually result in your completely missing the
market and not getting out of stocks that should be sold to avoid sub-
stantial losses.
16. Some investors have trouble making decisions to buy or sell. In
other words, they vacillate and can't make up their minds. They are
unsure because they really don't know what they are doing. They do not
have a plan, a set of principles, or rules, to guide them and, therefore,
are uncertain of what they should be doing.
17. Most investors cannot look at stocks objectively. They are always
hoping and having favorites, and they rely on their hopes and personal
opinions rather than paying attention to the opinion of the market-
place, which is more frequently right.
18. Investors are usually influenced by things that are not really cru-
cial, such as stock splits, increased dividends, news announcements, and
brokerage firm or advisory recommendations.
If you hunger to become a winning investor, read the above items
over very carefully several times and be totally honest with yourself.
How many of the habits mentioned above describe your investment
beliefs and practices? As Rockne would say, "These are the weaknesses
which you must systematically work on until you can change and build
them up into your strong points."
Poor principles and poor methods will yield poor results. Sound prin-
ciples and sound methods will, in time, create sound results.
My parting advice to you is: Have courage, be positive, and don't ever
give up. Great opportunities occur every year in America. Get yourself
prepared and go for it. You'll find that little acorns can grow into giant
oaks. Anything is possible with persistence and hard work. It can be done,
and your own determination to succeed is the most important element.

Index
Accounts, opening, 80-83
Accumulation/distribution, 184
Advance-decline line, 57
AIM Management, 43, 134, 137
Alcan Aluminum, 213
Alexander & Alex Services, 174
Alside, 102
Aluminum Company of America, 213
American Stock Exchange (AMEX),
119-120, 190,213
AMF, 100, 223
Amgen, 23, 27, 87, 110
AP price tables, 181-182
Armstrong Corp., 219
Arthur Weisenberger & Co., 40
Astrop, Bill, 91
Atlantic Research, 228
Averaging down, 94, 254—255
Avon Products, 42
Baruch, Bernard, 85-86, 87, 97, 212
Base on top of a base, 169
Baxter Laboratories, 168
Bear markets, 53-55, 57, 59, 64-65, 68,
112, 131-132,206
Beatles, 86
Berger, 43
Berlin, Irving, 86
Big block trades, 103-104, 212-213
Block houses, 103-104, 212-213
Boeing Co., 169, 224, 240
Bonds, convertible, 33, 121, 202
Brandywine, 43
Broker, finding, 80-83
Brokerage firms, 62-64, 80-83
commissions of, 63, 82, 135, 255, 256
discount, 63-64, 81, 83
Brunswick Corp., 87, 92, 100, 142, 223
Bull markets, 68, 112
Bullish posture, 243-246
Burroughs, 34, 219
Buy patterns, defective, 178
Buying:
great paradox and, 23-26
new products and, 22-23, 28
price increases and, 26-28
timing of, 22-28
volume of, 29-30
(See also Stock selection)
California State Teacher's Retirement
System, 231
Canadian Stock Exchange, 124
Capital gains taxes, 46-47
Carnegie, Andrew, 35
CDA Investment Technologies, 230
Centex Builders, 227
Certain-teed, 100, 101, 102, 167, 168
CGM Funds, 43, 135
Channel lines, 106
Chart(s), stock selection and (see Stock
selection)
Chart books, tape reading and, 210
Chiboucas, Donald, 137
Chrysler Corp., 15, 87, 102, 103
Church's Fried Chicken, 176
Churning, 211-212
Cisco Systems, 4, 17, 23, 166, 202
Clement Capital Inc., 242
Closed-end funds, 136
Commissions, 63, 82, 135, 255, 256
Commodity futures, 125
Commodore International, 219
Computer-vision, 23, 219
Consolidated tape, 214
Continental Illinois Bank, 122
Contra Fund, 43
Control Data, 38, 87
Convertible bonds, 33, 121, 202
Corporate earnings reports, 7, 13, 196—197

260
Cousin stock theory, 224
Crown Cork & Seal, 100
Cullinane Database, 219
Cup-with-a-handle structure, 114, 162-164,
178-179
Cyclical stocks, 15
Daily Graphs, Inc., 178-179
Daily Graphs service, 215, 225-226
Databases, 239-241
Datagraph ratings, 228, 229, 231-232, 253
Datapoint, 34
Day trading, 111
DeBeers, 126
Debt-to-equity ratio, 33
Defensive stock index, 74
Denver Slock Exchange, 124
Diamonds, 125-127
DiCarlo, Michael, 138
Discount brokerage firms, 63-64, 81, 83
Discount rates, 53-54, 76
Diversification, 109-110, 134
Dividends, 93-94, 114, 122, 255
Dollar General Corp., 167
Dome Petroleum, 4, 38, 142-143, 166, 232,
233
Double-bottom patterns, 166
Dow Jones Industrial Average, 44, 45,
47-50, 52,189
Dow Jones News Tape, 214
Dow Theory, 60-62
Downticks, 214-215
Dress Barn Inc., 228
Drew, Garfield, 72
Dreyfus, Jack, 99, 104, 207-208
Dreyfus Fund, 98-99, 134
E. L. Bruce, 167, 168
Earnings per share, 5-21
analysis of companies and, 20
calculating, 5, 8
comparing stocks on, 12-13
and debt-to-equity ratios, 33
deceleration of, 10-11
increases in, 5-6, 8-11, 14-15, 17-18
leaders and losers in, 17
log-scale graphs of, 11-12
market cycles in, 15—16
Index
Earnings per share (Cont.):
overemphasis on, 9-10
price-earnings ratios and, 10, 12, 18-21,
255
quarterly changes in, 7-11, 13, 16, 17-18
ranking of, 18, 182
reports of, 7, 13, 196-197
stability of, 16
Edison, Thomas A., 86
Educational funds, 251
Edwards, Robert D., 172-173
Electrospace Systems, 228
Entrepreneurial management, 30
Equity, ratio of debt to, 33
Essex Investment Management Co., 242
Evergreen Fund, 43
Extraordinary gains and losses, 8
Fairchild Camera, 87, 224
Fannie Mae, 177
Federal Reserve Board, 53-54, 76-77
Fidelity Funds, 99, 134, 135, 225
Fidelity Research & Management, 163
Financial news pages, 180-206
accumulation/distribution in, 184
in bear market, 206
corporate earnings in, 182
futures graphs in, 195-196
industries in, 193-195
interest rates in, 199-201
market indicators in, 189-190
market-sector graphs in, 190-193
mutual fund price tables in, 197-198
national economic analysis in, 204—205
new listings in, 198
New York analysts in, 202-204
news stories, impact of, 68-69, 216-217
option tables in, 187
price highs in, 187-189
psychological indicators in, 190
relative strength in, 183-184
stock graphs in, 183-184
volume percent change in, 185-186
world markets charted in, 198
yield-curve graphs in, 199-201
(See also Investor's Business Daily)
Financial World magazine, 239
Flag-price patterns, 167-168
Flat-base structure, 167
Index
261
Fleetwood, 224
Floating supply, 30
"Follow-on group effect," 224
Ford, 15
Foreign stocks, 124
401 (k) plans, 84
Freestone, Lee, 144
Friedman, Milton, 161
Friedman, Rose, 161
Friess Associates, Inc., 242
Futures, 125, 195-196
G. D. Searle, 35
Genentech, 21
General Electric, 165, 166
General market system, 102-103
General Motors, 215
Georgia Pacific, 219
Glamour index, 75
Global funds, 134-135
Gold, 125-127
Goldman, Sachs, 213
Graphs, 187-189
Daily Graphs, and, 178-179, 215,
225-226
Datagraph ratings, 228, 229, 231-232,
253
key market-sector, 190-193
of leading industries, 193-194
log-scale, 11-12
yield-curve, 199-201
Great paradox, 23-26
Great Western Financial, 87, 100
Greenspan, Alan, 53
Gross National Product (GNP), 76
Growth-fund index, 198, 199
Growth stocks, 14-15, 16, 19, 42, 162
Gulf Oil, 222
Hamilton, Peter, 62
Head-and-shoulders structures, 113—114,
174
Hechinger, 35
Hedging, 76, 116, 125
Heebner, Ken, 135
Hellman, Jordan Management Co., 242
Herschensohn, Bruce, 217
Hershey, 125
Hilton Hotels, 224
Holding, 106-108
Home Depot, 4, 34-35
Houston Oil & Gas, 23
Houston Oil & Minerals, 170,172
Hughes Tools, 222
Humana Inc., 5, 87
Hunt, Bunker, 211-212
Husic Capital Management, 242
Hutzler, Harry, 137
IBM, 34, 54, 215, 219
IDS Mutual, 134
Income funds, 133-134
Income stocks, 122
Index funds, 252-253
Individual retirement accounts (IRAs),
83-84
Industry analysts, 238-241
Industry groups, 218-229
advances of, 228-229
analyzing companies in, 20
buying leadership in, 34-35
changes in, 220-221, 224
comparing stock in, 12-13, 20
cousin stock theory and, 224
daily prices of, 193
defensive, 74, 228-229
"follow-on group effect" and, 224
group-strength ratings of, 225-226
investment analysts and, 238-241
leading, 193-194, 227-228
market changes and, 223
and market cycles, 67—68
position of stocks in, 229
sympathy moves in, 35, 36
tracking, 219, 227
weakness of one stock in, 221-222
Inflation-adjusted market index, 74
Initial public offerings, 119, 122-123,
176-177, 198, 235
Institutional Investor, 222, 239
Institutional investor (s), 31, 40-43,
230-253
analysis by, 238-241
bullish posture and, 243-246
Datagraph ratings and, 231-232
Financial World survey of, 239
in-house management of pension funds
and, 242-243
index funds and, 252-253

262
Institutional investor(s) (Cont.):
management and, 242-243, 250-251
management fees and, 249
mistakes of, 37-38, 42
over- and underweighting and, 236-237
"overowned" stock and, 41
portfolio theory and, 249-250
research reports for, 239
size problem and, 234-236
sponsorship by, 40-41
stock positions and, 42-43
unassailable growth stock and, 42
undervalued purchases by, 236-237,
248-249
Interest rates, 53-54, 76, 199-201
International funds, 134—135
International Game Technology, 23, 87
International Harvester, 254
INVESCO Capital Management, Inc.,
242
Investing, trading versus, 111
Investor's Business Daily, 13, 18, 36, 44, 81,
117, 136, 189-190, 226
(See also Financial news pages)
IPO Reporter, The, 123
IRAs (individual retirement accounts),
83-84
ITT, 221
Jack Eckerd Drug, 232
Jiler, William, 173-174
John Hancock Special Equities, 138
Johns Manville, 219
Jundt/Capen Associates, 242
Railing Capital Management, 242
Kaiser Aluminum, 213
Kaufman & Broad, 219, 221, 227
Kelly, Fred C., 94-95
Kemp, Jack, 205
Kennedy, Joe, 98
Kennedy, John F., 47, 54, 98, 102
Keogh plans, 84
Kerr-McGee, 100
Keystone S-4, 43
Kirby Exploration Co., 5
Korvette, 102, 103
Kunath, Karren, Rinne & Atkin, Inc., 242
Index
L. A. Gear, 204
Laggards, 17, 35, 36, 37, 55, 208
Leaders, 17, 34-37, 38-39, 55, 57, 208
Leading industries, 193-194, 227-228
Levitz Furniture Corp., 22, 35, 38, 87, 176
Lieber, Steve, 43
Limit orders, 45, 257
Limited Inc., 4, 162, 228
Lipper service, 136
Livermore, Jesse, 87, 100, 108, 164, 208
Loeb, Gerald M., 91, 98, 208
Loews (hotels), 224
Log-scale graphs, 11-12
Lorillard, 39
Losses, 91-96, 101-102, 256
defining, 88-89
limiting, 91-96
M/A-Com Inc., 5, 169
McDonald's Corp., 22
McGee.John, 172-173
Magellan Fund, 43
Management:
entrepreneurial, 30
institutional investing and, 242-243,
250-251
Margin accounts, 45-46, 111-112, 231
(See also Selling short)
Market, 44-78
advance-decline line and, 57
averages and, 44-45, 52
bear, 53-55, 57, 59, 64-65, 68, 112,
131-132,206
bottoms and, 59-60, 166, 174
bull, 68, 112
charts and, 45
Congress and, 46-47
cycles in, 67-68
discount firms and, 63-64, 81, 83
discount rate and, 53-54, 76
Dow Theory and, 60-62
expert opinion and, 65
Federal Reserve Board and, 53-54,
76-77
following leaders for clues to, 58
governmental influence on, 46-47,
53-54,76-77
index changes in, 51-52
industry groups and, 223-226
Index
263
Market (Cont.):
key factors in, 53-57
news events and, 68-69, 216-217
percentage changes and, 53
performance of, charted, 198
plunge of 1973-1974 and, 62-63
rallies in, 50-52, 57-58, 59
tops and, 45-46, 50, 57-58
volume of, 29-30, 47-50, 52, 74
Market cycles:
in earnings per share, 15-16
stages of, 67
Market index, inflation-adjusted, 74
Market indicators, 69-77, 189-190
monetary, 76-77
overbought/oversold, 66
psychological, 65-66, 190
Market sectors, graphs of, 190-193
Masco, 219
MCI Communications, 38-39, 87
Memorex, 38
Merger candidates, 123-124
Merrill Lynch, 82, 83, 215
Metromedia Inc., 32
MGIC Investment Corp., 219, 221
MGM, 99
Microsoft, 4, 17, 87
Mistakes:
common, 254-257
correcting, 53, 90
post-analysis of, 100-101
of professional investment managers,
37-38, 42
Mobil, 222
Modern portfolio theory, 249-250
Monetary base, 76
Monetary indicators, 76-77
Money managers, 242-243, 250-251
[See also Institutional investor(s)]
Monogram Industries, 224
Monthly investment plans, 135-136
Murchison, Clint, 211-212
Mutual funds, 131-138, 199
cash and equivalent position of, 73
investment philosophy of, 43
number owned, 134
price tables, 197-198
sales and redemptions of, 73
timing of purchases, 133, 134
[See also Institutional investor(s)]
N. L. Industries, 222
Naked options, 118, 257
Napoleon, 46
National Association of Securities Dealers
(NASD), 82
National Chemsearch, 176
NCR, 34
Neill, Humphrey, 217
Nelson, Benson & Zellmer, Inc., 242
New England Nuclear, 170
New issues, 119, 122-123, 176-177, 198,
235
New products, buying and, 22-23, 28
New Stock Market Ideas and Past Leaders to
Avoid, 240-241
New USA Mutual Fund, 132
New York Society of Security Analysts,
202-204
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), 51-52,
57, 63, 82, 189, 190, 213, 214
New York Stock Exchange composite,
51-52, 190
News stories, impact of, 68-69, 216-217
Newspapers (.seeFinancial news pages)
Nicholas-Applegate Capital Mgrnt., Inc.,
41,43,242
Nordstrom Inc., 177
Northern Capital Management, Inc., 242
Northrop, 19
NYSE (seeNew York Stock Exchange)
Odd-lot, short sales index, 71-72
Odd-lot-balance index, 71
Oil, 126,221-222, 224
OPEC (Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries), 126
Open-end funds, 131, 136
Oppenheimer, 134
Options, 72, 114, 115-118, 187, 214, 257
Outstanding stock, 29-32
buying own stock and, 32-33
debt-to-equity ratio and, 33
entrepreneurial management and, 30
institutional investors and, 31
number of shares of, 29-30
and selling short, 113
stock splits and, 31-32, 104
Over-the-counter (OTC) stocks, 118-119
index of, 190, 193

264
Overbought/oversold indicator, 66
Overhead supply, 175, 214
"Overowned" stock, 41
Overweighting, 238
P/E (price-earnings) ratio, 10, 12, 18-21,
255
Penny stocks, 124
Pension portfolios [see Institutional
investor(s)]
Pic'n'Save, 232-234
Pioneer Fund, 43
Pivot buy points, 164-165
Polaroid, 87
Portfolio:
number of stocks in, 109-110
[See also Institutional investor(s)]
Portfolio theory, 249-250
Post-analysis, 100-101
Price (s):
decline in, for most active stocks, 74
increases in, 26-28
of industry groups, 193
market volume and, 52
strength of, 35-36
tight, 164
Price Co., 23, 87, 166
Price-earnings (P/E) ratio, 10, 12, 18-21,
255
Price limits, 45, 257
Price-paid bias, 88, 89-90
Price structures:
cup-with-a-handle, 114, 162-164,
178-179
double-bottom, 166
faulty, detecting, 172-174
flag, 167-168
flat-base, 167
head-and-shoulders, 113-114, 174
saucer-with-handle, 165-166
wide-and-loose, 170-172
Price tables, 181-182, 197-198
Prime Computer, 4, 34, 87, 219
Proctor & Gamble, 99
Profit-and-loss plan, 98-99, 101-102
Profits, 92-93, 97-108, 255
Program trading, 76, 223
Prudential Insurance Company, 83
Prudential Securities, 82-83
Index
Psychological indicators, 65-66, 190
Public Employees' Retirement System, 231
Pyramiding, 100
Radio Shack (seeTandy Corp.)
Rallies, 50-52, 57-58, 59
Random-walk theories, 250, 253
Raytheon, 240
Reagan, Ronald, 3, 47, 67
Real estate purchases, 127-130
Record Book of Greatest Stock Market
Winners, The, 3
Reebok, 27
Regan, Donald, 204-205
Reinganum, Marc, 253
Relative strength, 36-37, 175, 183-184,
225-226
Rexall, 22
Reynolds Metals, 213
Reynolds Tobacco, 99
Rhea, Robert, 62
Rite Aid Corp., 176
Rockne, Knute, 254, 257
Rollins Environmental Services, 167, 168
Rolm Corp., 34
Rothschild, Nathan, 97
Rowan Companies, 222
Rumors, 105, 211-212, 255
Ruth, Babe, 86
Ryan, David, 143
Salomon Brothers, 213
Saucer-with-handle structure, 165—166
Schabacker, Richard, 172
Schlumberger, 222
Schoolar, Jonathan, 137
Scotty's Home Builders, 219
Scudder, 134
Sea Containers Inc., 162-163
Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC), 54, 63
Securities Investor Protection Corp.
(SIPC),82
Securities Research Co., 67
Security Pacific Bank, 41, 249
Selling, 256
averaging down and, 94, 254—255
Baruch's advice on, 85-86
Index
265
Selling (Cant.):
confidence and, 95-96
dividends and, 93-94
general market system and, 102—103
and growth stock tops, 42
holding versus, 106-108
Kennedy's secret for, 98
losses in, 88-96, 101-102
post-analysis and, 100-101
prime pointers for, 103-106
profits in, 92-93, 97-106, 256
pyramiding and, 100
record keeping and, 89-90
Rothschild's rule for, 97-98
speculation and, 87, 93, 255
success and failure in, 86-87
timing of, 85-108
typical investors and, 87—88
of worst-performing stocks, 37
Selling short, 21, 64, 65, 113-114
and margin accounts, 114
odd-lot, short-sales index, 71-72
short-interest ratio, 69-71
specialist short-selling index, 72-73
Sentinel Financial Instruments, 121
Sentinel Government Securities, 121
Shakeout-plus-three-points situation, 168
Short-interest ratio, 69-71
Short sales (see Selling short)
Silver, 125-127
Sirach/Flinn, Elvins Capital Mgint., 242
Snapple, 41
Software Toolworks, 39, 177
Southeastern Asset Management, 242
Specialist short-selling index, 72-73
Speculation, 87, 93, 255
SperryRand, 34, 219
Spread, 116
Standard & Poor's (S&P) 500 Index,
35-36,44,51-52,189,238
Standard Brands Paint, 219
Standard Kollsman, 142
Standard Oil of Indiana, 222
State funds, 251
Stock exchanges:
American, 119-120, 190, 213
Canadian, 124
Denver, 124
New York, 51-52, 57, 63, 82, 189, 190,
213,214
Stock indexes:
AMEX, 190
defensive, 74
glamour, 75
growth-fund, 198, 199
hourly changes in, 51-52
of Investor's Business Daily, 189-190
long-term, inflation adjusted, 74
market direction and, 51-52
NYSE, 51-52, 190
odd-lot, short-sales, 71-72
odd-lot-balance, 71
OTC, 190, 193
S&P 500, 35-36, 44, 51-52, 189, 238
specialist short-selling, 72-73
unweighted, 75
Stock selection:
base on top of a base and, 169
big volume clues in, 177-178
buy patterns and, 178
cup-with-a-handle patterns and, 114,
162-164, 178-179
double-bottom patterns and, 166
faulty patterns and base structures in,
172-174
flag-price patterns and, 167-168
flat-base structures and, 167
historical precedents in, 161
newer stocks and, 176—177
overhead supply and, 175, 214
pivot buy points and, 164-165
relative strength in, 36-37, 175,
183-184,225-226
saucer-with-handle patterns and, 165-166
shakeout-plus-three-points in, 168
tight price areas and, 164
timing of, 160-179
volume clues and, 177-178
volume dry ups and, 174-175
wide-and-loose structures and, 170-172
(See also Buying)
Stock splits, 31-32, 104
Stop-loss orders, 55, 107
Slower, Jim, 43
Straddles, 116
Strips, 116
Surgical Care Affiliates, 167
Sympathy moves, 35, 36
Syntex Corp., 4, 21, 22, 25, 35, 87, 103,
142, 167, 168

266
Tandem Computer, 34
Tandy, Charles, 234
Tandy Corp., 32, 234
Tape reading, 207-217
big block trades and, 103-104, 212-213
cautions about, 209-210
chart books and, 210
defensive stocks and, 211-212
key stocks and, 215
leaders and laggards and, 208
news events and, 216—217
overhead supply and, 214
quality and, 210
stock symbols and, 213
tips and, 211-212
upticks and downticks in, 214—215
year-end tape distortion and, 214
Tax-free securities, 121-122
Tax shelters, 121-122
Taxes, 46-47, 83-84, 112, 121-122, 256
Teledyne Inc., 32
Texas Instruments, 3
Texas Oil & Gas Corp., 166
Textone, 224
Thiokol Chemical Corp., 22
Thompson Funds, 43, 137
Tips, 211-212, 255
Toys R Us, 176
Trading:
big block, 103-104, 212-213
day, 111
investing versus, 111
Triple-bottom patterns, 174
Twentieth Century Funds, 43, 134,
137-138
. Undervalued buying, 236-237, 248-249
Underweighting, 238
Unemployment, 76
United Funds, 134
United Technologies, 240
Index
U.S. Gypsum, 219
U.S. Investing Championship, 143—144
Universal Match, 99
Unweighted stock index, 75
Upside/downside volume, 69
Upticks, 214-215
Value Line investment service, 123, 237,
253
Vanguard Group, 134
Varco International, 222
Velocity of money, 76
Vermilye, Peter, 10
Vickers, 40
Volker, Paul, 205
Waban, 35
Wal-Mart Stores, 17, 234
Wall Street Journal, The, 13, 216, 243, 246
WangLabs, 23, 34, 219
Warrants, 122
Weighting, 238
Weisenberger, Arthur & Co., 40, 136
Western Co. of North America, 222
Wickes Corp., 35
Wide-and-loose structure, 170-172
Williams, Harold, 63
Williams, Harrison, 63
Winners:
examples of, 119-120, 144-159
and group moves, 228
models of, 140-159, 183
small accounts and, 140—144
Wolf, Marshall, 140
Xerox, 3, 17,21,42
Yield-curve graphs, 199-201
About the Author
William J. O'Neil is one of Wall Street's most seasoned and
successful veterans. At age 30, he bought his own seat on the
Big Board with profits made in the stock market and founded
William O'Neil and Co., Inc., a leading investment research
organization now based in Los Angeles. The firm's current
clients are 600 of the top institutional investment managers
in the world. Mr. O'Neil created the New USA Mutual Fund,
whose assets are over $200 million—and is also the founder
of Investor's Business Daily, the fastest-growing national com-
petitor of The Wall Street Journal.

